[Amit Varma]: The Greek philosopher Heraclitus once said,
[Amit Varma]: No man ever steps in the same river twice, for it's not the same river and it's not the same man.
[Amit Varma]: I sometimes think back to the person I was in my early 20s and wonder how anyone who knew me then
[Amit Varma]: can still be friends with me. We all change with time and become different. But what is this
[Amit Varma]: difference? To me, it has to do with how we see the world. We come into this world and grow into
[Amit Varma]: this world with a certain vision of it, a way of seeing. This could be shaped by our geography,
[Amit Varma]: our circumstances, our upbringing, and all sorts of accidents. And as we go through life,
[Amit Varma]: this way of seeing changes. Layers of blindness that once stopped us from seeing certain facets
[Amit Varma]: of the world are stripped away. And sometimes we add layers because we want to see the world
[Amit Varma]: in a certain way. Some people can go through life as blind at 80 as ever at 20. And maybe that's
[Amit Varma]: one road to happiness. But if you keep your eyes open, chances are that you will see more and what
[Amit Varma]: you see will change what you are. And there are certain callings which require seeing. If you
[Amit Varma]: are a writer or an artist or a filmmaker or a journalist, your most important faculty is
[Amit Varma]: observation. And that means not just looking at things but seeing them. As my guest on today's
[Amit Varma]: show says, going beyond the facts and searching for the truth. Welcome to the scene and the unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host,
[Amit Varma]: Amit Verma. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Annie Zaidi, a blogger,
[Amit Varma]: journalist, playwright, filmmaker, and I guess she'd just be happy calling herself a writer.
[Amit Varma]: Annie is written widely about so many subjects that I wasn't sure what I would speak to her
[Amit Varma]: about. In fact, that's why I haven't invited her on the show before. I couldn't pin down any one
[Amit Varma]: thing that an episode could be about. But I knew that I could have a great conversation with her,
[Amit Varma]: rambling from one subject to another. I've done discursive episodes like that before which have
[Amit Varma]: turned out to be wonderful, with the likes of Pratap Bhanumata, Paromita Vora, Russ Roberts,
[Amit Varma]: Deepak Shinoi, Rukmini S, and just last week, Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley. So I finally stopped procrastinating
[Amit Varma]: and invited Annie to the scene and the unseen. And I'm so glad I did. This turned out to be
[Amit Varma]: such a stimulating conversation. And it isn't even such a ramble. We spoke about many things, yes,
[Amit Varma]: language to politics to religion to art, but without my planning it that way, one larger theme
[Amit Varma]: ran through all of this. How if you combine curiosity with humility, you can see the world
[Amit Varma]: so much more clearly. And the fact that Annie has been so prolific with her fiction, her nonfiction
[Amit Varma]: with plays and short films means that we get to see what she sees and expand our view of the world.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to discover her work, I suggest starting with her recent memoir, Bread, Cement,
[Amit Varma]: Cactus. But first, conversation. Before we get there, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I've worked on in recent years is on getting my reading habit together.
[Amit Varma]: This involves making time to read books, but it also means reading long form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the big question we all face is,
[Amit Varma]: how do we navigate this knowledge? Who will be our guide to all the awesome writing out there?
[Amit Varma]: Well, a couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at
[Amit Varma]: ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves constantly to stay relevant for
[Amit Varma]: the future. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects covered went
[Amit Varma]: from machine learning to mythology, to mental models to even marmalade. This helped me build
[Amit Varma]: a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I had
[Amit Varma]: before. Many listeners of the scene and the unseen asked me, hey, how can I build my reading habit?
[Amit Varma]: How can I up level my brain? Well, I have an answer for you. Head on over to CTQ Compounds
[Amit Varma]: and check out the Daily Reader as well as other activities which will help you up level your
[Amit Varma]: future self. The next batch starts on Saturday, March 13. And they have already done 15 batches
[Amit Varma]: before this. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping rupees 2500-2500. If you use the
[Amit Varma]: discount code UNSEEN, this is for both the Daily Reader and Future Stack, another exciting program
[Amit Varma]: they have. So hey, head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Uplevel yourself. Annie, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for having me. I've been wanting to invite you for a long time. And
[Amit Varma]: but what kind of baffled me was that what do we talk about not because there's nothing to talk
[Amit Varma]: about, but because there's so much to talk about in terms of how prolific you have been with the
[Amit Varma]: kind of writing that you do, the kind of art that you do, plays as well, films and all of that. And,
[Amit Varma]: but eventually, I thought that no, you know, should just call Annie on the show and just
[Amit Varma]: try to have a good conversation about anything and everything. But first, let's sort of talk about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your early days before you came into journalism, like I absolutely
[Amit Varma]: loved your book, Bread, Seam and Cactus. And in the first chapter there, you sort of talk about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, growing up in the town of JK Puram, tell me a little bit about that. And we are broadly the
[Amit Varma]: same age. And, you know, one thread that's kind of been unravelling through a few episodes when
[Amit Varma]: I've had guests of again, around my age, is just sort of talking about how back in those days,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the things that we take for granted simply weren't there in terms of the internet
[Amit Varma]: and access to all the information in the world and all the knowledge in the world and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So all of us sort of, you know, we consumed the outside world in very piecemeal and random ways,
[Amit Varma]: and those piecemeal and random ways could shape us. And otherwise, we were kind of shaped only
[Amit Varma]: by our immediate sort of geographical location. So, you know, tell me a bit about your childhood,
[Amit Varma]: what kind of kid were you? What did you want to be? What did you read? Did you read?
[Guest]: So reading is the one thing I think that I've always done. And I think I also did a kind of
[Guest]: pre-reading. I was talking to my mother last week, and she told me this quite recently.
[Guest]: I still remember some nursery rhymes from my childhood, particularly Hindi nursery rhymes.
[Guest]: I had them by heart. And everybody in the family used to kind of tease me about me going on,
[Guest]: you know, walking around the house reciting nursery rhymes, etc. These were not nursery
[Guest]: rhymes that were from my own books. These were from my older brother's books. He's
[Guest]: three or four years ahead in the academic way. And when I was two years old, maybe two or two
[Guest]: and a half, I hadn't quite learned to read. But my mother tells me that I had the rhymes by heart.
[Guest]: And I wasn't yet going to school, but my brother was. And there was this book, this book of Hindi
[Guest]: rhymes. And every time he left the house with it, she says I used to look really anxious.
[Guest]: Not so much that he's leaving, but that the book is leaving. Is this book going to come back?
[Guest]: I think the word and particularly the written word and literature in some form has been there
[Guest]: in my life from the beginning. This is the one thing that hasn't changed at all. That aside,
[Guest]: I think the other thing in our household was that because my grandfather was a writer
[Guest]: and he invested quite heavily in education and literature and culture for his children,
[Guest]: he couldn't afford a lot. The one thing he would not compromise on was education. So he,
[Guest]: as to the extent that he was able, he sent them to the whatever was considered the best schools.
[Guest]: And he did not stint on books. So, for example, when once in his life, I think all his children
[Guest]: were grown up by that time. My mother was already married by that time. But once in his life,
[Guest]: he got a chance to go to the United States and he kind of traveled widely, came back and
[Guest]: he didn't come back with clothes. He came back with a trunk full of books.
[Guest]: And I remember reading those books and seeing those books and they're like
[Guest]: the maroon leather binding. And I think that was the kind of family and household I was growing up
[Guest]: in. And there was no question of you being denied things to read. As long as people could afford it,
[Guest]: you had it. When we moved to JK Puram, though, it was slightly different.
[Guest]: This is a way out place, as I describe in my memoir. My mother was looking for jobs,
[Guest]: and the kind of best job that she could find at the time was in an industrial township.
[Guest]: Anyone in India who's grown up in an industrial township kind of knows it. There's a template
[Guest]: to it. You know, they're called, quote unquote, colony. And it is usually near some kind of
[Guest]: natural resource. So in our case, it was near limestone deposits in the hills,
[Guest]: with other factories, it is something else, you know, coal deposits or, you know,
[Guest]: for steel plants and things like that. For us, it was the Aravalli range in Rajasthan. And Rajasthan
[Guest]: is one of those states that has the most number of cement factories because that's where the
[Guest]: limestone is. So we moved there and there was a little school there because there were so few
[Guest]: facilities. I think, I believe there was some kind of primary school, a government school in the
[Guest]: village nearby. But otherwise, for employees, there was nowhere else they could go. So this is
[Guest]: an attempt to set up a private school, which was by the company and for the employees, exclusively
[Guest]: for the employees of that company, the factory. So that's where, from the first onwards, I had
[Guest]: been to kindergarten and other places, but I think from the first standard to the 11th standard,
[Guest]: to the 11th standard, that's where I went. My mother worked in that school, initially as vice
[Guest]: principal, then as principal. She didn't really teach me though. She taught my brother a little
[Guest]: bit, but not me. She had administrative duties, etc. And she was very, in some ways, a very
[Guest]: lenient parent, but also a very, how should I say, for instance, she was concerned about
[Guest]: academics because she had to be, that was her job. But for everyone in the family, she wouldn't be
[Guest]: concerned only about me. So she wouldn't teach just me. And this just almost never changed.
[Guest]: It was only once when I was failing quite badly in math, because we couldn't find appropriate math
[Guest]: tutors in that little place. And she wasn't a math tutor herself. So she had to read math and then
[Guest]: try and teach me whatever she could understand. But except for, I think, that one month in my
[Guest]: entire 11 years, she did not teach me at all. She did not teach me English literature. She did not
[Guest]: teach me the social sciences. She kind of left it that, you know, okay, this is the school I run,
[Guest]: and she will learn what everyone else reads and learns. But I read a lot. And I read everything
[Guest]: I could lay my hands on, which wasn't a lot, because this place where I was growing up,
[Guest]: it had one ration ki dukan, one sabzi ki dukan, one kind of, I think, very small little things
[Guest]: where you could get pins and socks and just cool stuff. You couldn't, one halwai shop,
[Guest]: that I remember, it had one halwai shop, and nothing else. You couldn't buy your books there,
[Guest]: you couldn't buy birthday cakes there. You couldn't, you certainly couldn't buy anything
[Guest]: that you wanted to read for pleasure. So my earliest memories of reading for pleasure are
[Guest]: when we used to go for the summer holidays. We would go, and there was this railway station,
[Guest]: and you had to kind of sign a requisition form, requisition a cab, and then that cab would take
[Guest]: you to the station. And while we were waiting for the trains, there was a wheeler stall there.
[Guest]: And we were allowed, for a journey, we were allowed one book each. So that was such an
[Guest]: exciting thing, one, to see the stall, to just see this bhandar of books, which I was just
[Guest]: completely obsessed by the fact that they were books and you could buy them, and that I could
[Guest]: choose one. So a lot of time was just spent choosing things. My brother was allowed one,
[Guest]: I was allowed one. And I obviously read too fast, and the journey was much longer. So the book would
[Guest]: be done in maybe three or four hours, and my brother and I would exchange books, and then
[Guest]: that would be finished too. And the rest of the journey, I would just be staring at my mom and,
[Guest]: you know, mom, I'm bored, mom, I'm bored, mom, I'm bored. This was my refrain through all journeys
[Guest]: for, as I think, for the longest time. But I was never allowed more than one book or one magazine
[Guest]: in all those years. However, my mom was responsible for stocking the library. So
[Guest]: once a year, she would go out and buy 30 books, 50 books, whatever she was allowed,
[Guest]: she was given a budget. And that was my reading growing up. And I would borrow what I could
[Guest]: from other people, uncles, aunties, friends, whatever I could borrow. Otherwise, it was a
[Guest]: very small life, a very limited life, because the kind of place that it was, and because there was
[Guest]: no public transport, and we didn't have our own transport, we didn't have a car, and I certainly
[Guest]: didn't know how to drive. And there's nowhere to go. I mean, even now, I have revisited the place.
[Guest]: I went back and some old teachers are still there, some of the older teachers and some of the
[Guest]: schoolmates. And there's nowhere to go. You can drive out in either direction for maybe 15,
[Guest]: 20 minutes, you might come upon a dhaba, you can eat there, but there's nothing else to do. There
[Guest]: are no clubs, there are no, except for the school itself, there are no libraries, there are no
[Guest]: cinemas within that little place. So that was the kind of upbringing where books were your only
[Guest]: entertainment and escape into anything. And you mentioned that your grandfather,
[Amit Varma]: of course, had written this memoir called Gubare Karwan. Did you read that when you were a kid? Or
[Amit Varma]: did you read that later? What impression did it make on you? Much later, much later, I knew nothing
[Guest]: of my grandfather's work. Plus, it was in Urdu, and it hasn't been translated. And I came to Urdu
[Guest]: very late in my life. When I began to research this question of identity and belonging, and
[Guest]: a little bit of whatever I remembered from what my grandfather told me, I grew interested. And
[Guest]: then I dug up this memoir and I began to read it. Even then, I really struggled, I needed help to
[Guest]: transcribe it, because the lettering is old fashioned. I mean, now with Urdu, if you have
[Guest]: modern fonts, which are a little more clear, but if things were handwritten and typeset in the old
[Guest]: way, it's really confusing. So I always need to cross check with someone who knows the language
[Guest]: better to kind of send them snapshots and say, am I reading this correct? Is this correct? What is
[Guest]: this word? It's difficult. I knew very little about my grandfather. My grandfather was a very busy man.
[Guest]: He worked, of course, and even after retirement, he took up a post-retirement position,
[Guest]: and he had his own writing and things. So he used to get up at maybe five in the morning
[Guest]: and write for about three hours before he went to work, before he went to office.
[Guest]: And then he used to come back and used to have a cup of tea and maybe a little bit of
[Guest]: conversation. And then he used to write again for three hours in the evening,
[Guest]: and then it was dinner and bedtime. So the kind of, I mean, I regret not having those
[Guest]: conversations with him while I could, you know, the long lengthy conversations about
[Guest]: where we're from, his ideas about politics, but I could never have that because he was
[Guest]: busy creating the literature, I suppose.
[Amit Varma]: And was that aspirational to you in some way, having someone like that in your family who
[Amit Varma]: was a learned man of letters, who was writing, you know, at that point in time, did you,
[Amit Varma]: you know, think of the world in terms of, look, I like to read, I'd also like to write,
[Amit Varma]: or is that something that really happened much later? How did you see yourself in those days?
[Guest]: I don't think I grew up with any sense of wanting to be a writer. I didn't know what
[Guest]: I wanted to be. I would keep changing my answer when people asked. I mean, I hated it when
[Guest]: people asked, what do you want to be when you grow up? I suppose like all kids, I cast
[Guest]: around for what other people were saying. So if somebody said doctor, I would also say
[Guest]: doctor. No intention ever of actually being a doctor. Then for a while I figured out,
[Guest]: okay, science is not my thing. So what can I do? Then I would say I want to be an IS
[Guest]: officer and everybody would be mighty pleased. Ah, that's what she'd be. But I had no intention
[Guest]: of being an IS officer either. I was very confused about what I wanted to do for the
[Guest]: longest time. By the time I was in my ninth or 10th though, I think one thing was clear
[Guest]: to me so that I wanted to do something around literature, English literature. I knew I wanted
[Guest]: to study English literature. I still continued to study science rather than literature in
[Guest]: my higher secondary, mostly I think circumstances and that's how it was. But I think I knew,
[Guest]: my family also knew that my main strength lay in letters and words. I was very confused
[Guest]: about what to do, like for a career. I remember in my, was it 10th or 12th, one of these times,
[Guest]: I was sent off to, maybe my 12th, I think, after my 12th, I was sent off to live with
[Guest]: my grandparents for the summer vacation for maybe a month or two months. And I remember
[Guest]: going to Lucknow, it was just me and the two of them. And my grandfather would be busy
[Guest]: reading, writing as was his, you know, his thing. I didn't know what to do with myself.
[Guest]: And there was this question of what will you do later? And with literature, I knew that
[Guest]: there's one thing you can do, which is teaching. And apart from teaching, you have no options
[Guest]: in life and I did not want to be a teacher. So what else could I do? I began to sit down
[Guest]: and make lists of, okay, what are my skills? And I realized I have no actual skills.
[Guest]: So my grandfather had an old typewriter and I thought, okay, let me learn to type. Kuch
[Guest]: nahi toh I can be a typist or a secretary at least. So I taught myself to type then
[Guest]: on that old typewriter and used to copy some of his letters and poems just for practice
[Guest]: and things. I remember doing that. But even then, no sense of writing originally. I was
[Guest]: just copying stuff. I was not writing. I did write essays for school, et cetera, but more
[Guest]: as an extracurricular activity, not as something I felt I was committed to. In college too,
[Guest]: I had no sense until I think the end of my first year when I discovered that maybe I
[Guest]: could write a little poetry. You enter these little competitions. I entered one of these
[Guest]: impromptu competitions and then for the first time I wrote something original. And I think
[Guest]: just by fluke, I think I won a prize because it was just girls of my age. It's not like
[Guest]: you're competing against, all of us are just starting out. But when that happened, I also
[Guest]: discovered that, okay, there is self-expression here and that I can do this, that this is
[Guest]: something that taps into some part of me, not as a career. I wasn't even thinking of
[Guest]: that. I was just thinking that, okay, this is something I have a certain affinity for.
[Guest]: I read and maybe I can write. And then I started writing poems and short stories, et cetera.
[Guest]: Again, not thinking of it as a career, just thinking of it as, you know, okay, let's try
[Guest]: this sort of thing. I remained confused about being a writer, I think, until after I graduated
[Guest]: and I started studying journalism, at which point I think finally I then understood that,
[Guest]: okay, writing is my thing.
[Amit Varma]: And so a dual question, one is that in those, you know, teenage years, so to say, or as
[Amit Varma]: a child, or who were the writers of the books that you really liked, that you really enjoyed?
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, I think in the life of a writer, there comes a point where, because they get
[Amit Varma]: so involved with writing and language, they become mindful of the writing of others, the
[Amit Varma]: tricks that others are using, what they are doing with the language, the rhythms they
[Amit Varma]: are creating, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And what was that shift like for you? Was it a very gradual process? Or was there like
[Amit Varma]: Arundhati Roy, when she wrote God a Small Thing, said that it was when she started writing
[Amit Varma]: the book that her quality of her reading just went up, which is a phrase that struck with
[Amit Varma]: me the quality of reading. So what was that shift like? And then who were the kind of
[Amit Varma]: writers you began to look up to not just for what they wrote about in thematic terms, but
[Amit Varma]: also the craft and how they did what they did?
[Guest]: I think actually, I started thinking about craft very late, like very late, given that
[Guest]: I used to read so much. But I think part of the reason was that I used to read at breakneck
[Guest]: speed. I used to reread when I ran out of reading material. So, you know, over the holidays,
[Guest]: I would read in these intense bursts, like I would finish 30 books in two months, 40
[Guest]: books in two months. And then that space, how much time do you have to pick up craft,
[Guest]: right? So I'd read, I remember. However, I did start paying attention to themes. I think
[Guest]: when I was in around high school, the question of themes, I think, came first and craft later.
[Guest]: Craft, I think I began to notice only in my late 20s. Because I think even in my own
[Guest]: writing, I started to be a little bit ambitious about writing like in a creative way, in my
[Guest]: early 20s. And wanting to be published and all of that wasn't happening, not that quickly,
[Guest]: which was good for me, actually, I think, because now I think back,
[Guest]: I thought I was ready to be published in my early 20s. I tried to pull together a manuscript and
[Guest]: met a few publishers. There were very few publishers at the time, and obviously made
[Guest]: no headway. But I kept writing, I kept writing and kept sort of practicing in a sense. And when
[Guest]: I think back, I was writing extremely mediocre stuff. And if that had got published, I think
[Guest]: I would not have grown much as a writer. But at some point in my mid 20s, I was working as a
[Guest]: journalist full time, but I joined and I also joined and formed, set up two peer review groups
[Guest]: for writers, for aspiring writers. And what we used to do is we used to meet and read out
[Guest]: our work to each other, and give feedback and things like that. I think that is when a little
[Guest]: bit of attention to craft started to happen, at least the mistakes I was making with my own craft.
[Guest]: And I mean, you could call them mistakes, or you can just say how other people were responding to
[Guest]: that. I became more conscious of that. And along with that, I think when I started to read something
[Guest]: and something would really blow me away. So for example, I remember reading Paul Ester's New York
[Guest]: and just the craft of that. It's so in your face, and it's unavoidable, right? You have to,
[Guest]: oh Murakami, when you first read Murakami, it's like that, okay, what's he doing here?
[Guest]: Why is this working, even though it should not work, you know, in a conventional sense.
[Guest]: That I think happened in my mid to late 20s, when I began to, perhaps I think maybe because
[Guest]: I was also writing and paying attention to what was working and what wasn't.
[Amit Varma]: And when you sort of think about writing and craft, how much of a difference does it make
[Amit Varma]: that you're actually imbibing culture in different languages? So it's not just English and English,
[Amit Varma]: it's Urdu, it's Hindustani, as it were, as you know, we'll discuss the languages
[Amit Varma]: later in this episode. But how much did all of that influence your writing? Because it strikes
[Amit Varma]: me that all of these languages, in terms of values, in terms of what they sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: privilege in the way they are structured, are very different from each other. Something that works in
[Amit Varma]: Urdu may not work in English and vice versa. Murakami is interesting that you named him
[Amit Varma]: because he's such a rhythmic musical writer. But at the same time, like so many other Japanese
[Amit Varma]: writers, there's also this, you know, a sparseness to his prose, a simplicity to his prose,
[Amit Varma]: which might have something to do with the Japanese language itself, that it doesn't,
[Amit Varma]: say value or give space for expressionism in the same way that Urdu or Bengali might.
[Amit Varma]: So all of them kind of bring different things to the table. And that's just language like even in
[Amit Varma]: terms of storytelling, the sort of traditions that you get, you know, the tradition of the
[Amit Varma]: American short story is so different from how Indian writers would kind of approach it, you
[Amit Varma]: know. So what was that process of figuring out all these influences? At what point do you start
[Guest]: consciously thinking about them and all of that? So I think that because Urdu, I was more or less
[Guest]: cut off from Urdu literature. There was, it was in the air in the way that spoken Urdu always is,
[Guest]: I think, especially in North India. It's just there around you. Hindi, a little bit from
[Guest]: literature. But I also think that what happened with Hindi was that after primary school, very
[Guest]: quickly, I stopped enjoying. The kind of texts that were prescribed were, I suppose, literary
[Guest]: from the point of view of the people who make syllabi, but it was very difficult. The kind of
[Guest]: language used was heavily Sanskritized, that version of Hindi, and I completely lost interest
[Guest]: in. It was there. We still studied it and analyzed it and passed the exams, I suppose. But I think
[Guest]: in secondary school, I do not have a memory of enjoying it much. I do have a very sharp memory
[Guest]: of this poem. I've never forgotten it, partly because of its simplicity, partly because it was
[Guest]: just so different from the Sanskritized kind of literature, both in its intent and the kind of
[Guest]: morality that Hindi literature seemed to be imbued with, you know, kind of punitive morality.
[Guest]: And it wasn't. It was very refreshing, this poem called Radha Sandarya. It was prescribed on our
[Guest]: school syllabus, but it is not in like what is called Shuddh Hindi. It's not pure Hindi.
[Guest]: So the lines go something like this. It compares the beauty of Radha to various things and various
[Guest]: animals particularly. And it was so striking, the imagery, because one, the imagery itself,
[Guest]: it comes from, I think, a pre-contemporary era. So it says,
[Guest]: which means the waist, the lion. She has stolen her waist from the lion.
[Guest]: And gaj ko churaya chaal, which is hati se churaya chaal. And it says kahe kavi beni beni
[Guest]: bayal ki churai leni, which is that she has stolen a hair from the nagin, from the snake.
[Guest]: And that imagery was striking, the language was striking. I didn't understand much of this and
[Guest]: I didn't understand much of that. But I remember very sharply enjoying it and understanding that
[Guest]: this is the kind of thing that I enjoy reading. And I wish that there was more of it.
[Guest]: And the playfulness of it, you know, the last line is,
[Guest]: And similarly with English, I remember there was this poem prescribed, not for me,
[Guest]: but for my brother, because I would, I was always reading three years ahead
[Guest]: when his books arrived for his sessions. I would first finish reading my books,
[Guest]: then I would finish reading his books for both English and Hindi. And then,
[Guest]: of course, the year would proceed and you'd have to be taught the same text.
[Guest]: So I think I did have a fairly solid grounding in that way, in at least two languages.
[Guest]: Urdu, I think I got more from Hindi films. Hindi films were a huge influence on me,
[Guest]: even though we didn't have a television for the longest time. But I think at some point,
[Guest]: we used to, you know, there used to be these people who used to travel through with projectors,
[Guest]: they would set up this white sheet and they would project the film onto it. And you would just sit
[Guest]: there on a dhari or on a chair, like a folding chair, people would carry out their folding
[Guest]: chairs and sit and watch the film. So that's how I watched some of my earliest cinemas,
[Guest]: Hindi films. And I remember them very clearly. I learned to memorize the songs. I had a little
[Guest]: notebook in which I would memorize the Hindi film songs and I would write them down. That was my
[Guest]: time pass. And so I knew that I still know them by heart, all those songs of the 70s and 80s that
[Guest]: I saw growing up. What's your favorite? Tell us one.
[Guest]: Favorite is hard. You know, there was this cassette, like this magnetic tape cassette
[Guest]: that we had, which was old Lata songs, like really old ones. And there's this one that I
[Guest]: really like, which is Thandi Hawaayin Laira Ke Aayin, Tum Ho Kahan, something like that,
[Guest]: which I knew all of that by heart also. And also Lata Ke Dard Bhare Ki, all of those.
[Guest]: I think the poetry there, and I absorbed it without it being taught to me. And that was
[Guest]: very good for me, I think, because I learned to then enjoy it without being tested on it.
[Guest]: But that was my only literary influence as far as Urdu was concerned. The mixed inheritance was more,
[Guest]: I would say Hindi rather than English. I mean, Hindi and English.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'll quote a paragraph from you from your book, where you've sort of described this
[Amit Varma]: very eloquently, where you say, quote, Hindustani, a colloquial Hindi, which was nearer Urdu was
[Amit Varma]: indeed my possession. The Sanskrit infused version of Hindi taught in school was a burden I bore
[Amit Varma]: reluctantly. It was as if the syllabus had been designed to test how far the envelope of
[Amit Varma]: comprehension could be pushed. The Hindi of movies, songs, friends, of contemporary poetry
[Amit Varma]: and fiction was like a cozy room with a rug on the floor. Official Hindi was more like a
[Amit Varma]: official Hindi was like sitting on a stone floor on cold winter nights, stop code. And I kind of
[Amit Varma]: loved that. And a lot of this a lot of, you know, how, what was essentially one language, whether
[Amit Varma]: you call it Hindustani, or you call it something else, was, you know, went in these different
[Amit Varma]: directions because of politics is, is so tragic. And you see the sort of contrived effect of that
[Amit Varma]: on, you know, the worst of Shuddh Hindi as it were, and as indeed, it would probably have been
[Amit Varma]: taught in the schools. I mean, even I remember some pretty dreary Hindi back in the day, though,
[Amit Varma]: my listeners will be amused to know, by the way, an aside that in both the 10th and the 12th,
[Amit Varma]: I got more marks in Hindi than in English. So there you go, power of memorizing big words,
[Amit Varma]: do not try this in any other language. But tell me a little bit about all of that the sort of
[Amit Varma]: politics behind language, which has affected not only language, but, you know, all of us,
[Guest]: essentially. I started thinking about the politics of language only in recent years,
[Guest]: partly because it has been, I think, perhaps on purpose politicized to this extent. I didn't
[Guest]: think much about not being taught Urdu, for example, I, I just didn't think very much about
[Guest]: it when I was growing up. It was what it was, you took it for granted. I regretted it, though,
[Guest]: because as I grew more interested in poetry, particularly Urdu poetry,
[Guest]: I wanted to know more. And my grandfather was an Urdu poet. So I would ask my mom to read out
[Guest]: some of his poems, you know, whatever books we had, I would ask her to read them out,
[Guest]: and then we would copy them down in Hindi. And then we would write letters to him to say,
[Guest]: explain this, explain this word, explain this word. And that was my actually earliest
[Guest]: Urdu lessons in school. And I was really interested, but there was no way to do it.
[Guest]: I think, I began to think about the politics, particularly because it became a physical
[Guest]: threat. At some point, there's this reports in the media a few years ago about people were kind of
[Guest]: being facing hostile reactions in metros and buses if they were seen carrying Urdu literature,
[Guest]: or any Urdu literature being equated with, you know, as something foreign and therefore worthy
[Guest]: of suspicion. And this kind of started to upset me. It really upset me, of course, because not only is,
[Guest]: I mean, obviously, I have a personal inheritance of Urdu from my family, but that apart,
[Guest]: if any language can be called authentically Indian, it is most definitely Urdu. It was created
[Guest]: in the heart of India, somewhere between from Punjab down up to the Deccan, that that's where
[Guest]: it was made. And it's absolutely ridiculous that people know this. You know, everybody studied that
[Guest]: much in school and everybody knows this. So this otherization, the designation of a language as
[Guest]: not being from here, or just because other people who are now foreign, just because different people
[Guest]: who live in different countries also own that language, that you should start to treat it with
[Guest]: hostility at home, was something that I found quite shocking, actually. But once I started
[Guest]: thinking about that, I also began to think about language and power. And then that took me back to
[Guest]: Jaikipura and where I was growing up. Where I was growing up, a small place, obviously. As I've said,
[Guest]: everybody who moved to that colony was from somewhere else. Everybody, everybody I knew
[Guest]: had come from, say, Gujarat, from Rajasthan, from other parts of India, wherever. There were Malayali
[Guest]: students, there were Gujarati students. We had, at some point, a third language requirement. I think
[Guest]: something about CBSE rules having changed or something. And then the question of what third
[Guest]: language can be taught to us, in addition to English Hindi and Sanskrit. Sanskrit was, of
[Guest]: course, compulsory. But in addition to that, we needed one more language. So we thought about it,
[Guest]: and I think it was decided, because Rajasthan's official language is Hindi, it was decided that
[Guest]: we should learn Gujarati, because Gujarat is the nearest other state. So for two years, I did learn
[Guest]: Gujarati. But the fact is that Rajasthan does have two or three other languages. It doesn't have,
[Guest]: necessarily, its own distinct script. So, Mewari, Marwari. We were surrounded by villagers with
[Guest]: whom we could not communicate. Labourers would come and they would go. They would talk in their
[Guest]: own language. It did not strike anyone, because these were not quote-unquote, board languages.
[Guest]: We were never going to give our official exams in any of those languages. So, we had to learn
[Guest]: our official exams in Mewari or Marwari. It was just a question of picking up another language.
[Guest]: But the school and the CBSE system did not see fit to then say, okay, why not a local language,
[Guest]: which is perhaps not designated amongst the, you know, whatever, the 16 or 20 or 25,
[Guest]: whatever languages there were in the constitutional list. Why not one more of those?
[Guest]: And it effectively, what language and its politicization does is that it seals people
[Guest]: off from each other. This is one of the things that official discourse around languages does.
[Guest]: It ensures that you actually cannot communicate with people who do not know your language. I mean,
[Guest]: that's fundamental, right? If you want to communicate with someone, you must learn
[Guest]: their language. So, what you're saying is that people who are schooled in Hindi or whose mother
[Guest]: tongue is Hindi ought not to then communicate with people whose mother tongue is not Hindi.
[Guest]: Or alternatively, the people whose mother tongue is not Hindi, if they want to communicate at all,
[Guest]: either with other citizens or with the state, you know, which they must, they don't have an
[Guest]: option but to communicate with the state, must then quit on their own language and develop a
[Guest]: certain facility with another language. These were things I began to think of especially as a journalist
[Guest]: because as I traveled, I found that, you know, there is this kind of general thing which is
[Guest]: told to us and I never questioned it either that, you know, Hindi is the most widely spoken language.
[Guest]: Everybody in India speaks Hindi except for the south and maybe the northeast. Everybody understands
[Guest]: Hindi, etc., etc., etc. Everybody understands Hindi to the extent that if you speak in very
[Guest]: simple ways, they may kind of understand what you're saying. Doesn't mean they can talk back
[Guest]: to you in that language or that they can express the nuances of what they want to convey that
[Guest]: language. I was covering at one point various north Indian states, so Punjab for sure but also
[Guest]: Himachal and I traveled a lot to Madhya Pradesh and honestly speaking, if I was not accompanied
[Guest]: by one other person and I usually was, it could be an NGO worker, could be, sometimes it was a
[Guest]: government person, sometimes it was or it was just somebody from the panchayat whose Hindi was
[Guest]: slightly better than the rest of the community. If I did not have help, I could not have reported at all
[Guest]: and I think that even so, knowing all this, my reportage was most definitely
[Guest]: restricted and not as good as it should be because what you're basically saying is that,
[Guest]: one, if you're communicating, for example, if I'm going into a community and I need the help of say
[Guest]: the Sarpanch or say the two people who are well educated in Hindi, well educated enough to
[Guest]: communicate with me and take me to, you know, the homes of the people whoever I want to speak to
[Guest]: and if there is somebody who is very marginalized in that community who say does not get along with
[Guest]: the Sarpanch or who will not even know that there's a journalist and she wants to talk to you
[Guest]: unless other people tell that person and bring that person out to talk to me and interpret for me.
[Guest]: If that does not happen, then who am I reporting? What am I reporting? I'm automatically reporting
[Guest]: from the lens and the perspective of the most privileged people in that community
[Guest]: and I became aware of that increasingly, like I found myself increasingly uncomfortable
[Guest]: because I found that I am not able to speak with the most powerless people wherever I go
[Guest]: and this is something that if I cannot, the state most certainly cannot or does not even want to.
[Guest]: So how does this work? How does this work in a diverse country where
[Guest]: not everyone speaks the same language?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, one of the sort of the revelations for me in your book was how language can form almost
[Amit Varma]: a layer of social hierarchy which is, you know, which is like caste or which is like class and
[Amit Varma]: those are the things we talk about but language does a similar thing and of course at a basic
[Amit Varma]: level we all know that because of our post-colonial baggage and all of that English has become a
[Amit Varma]: marker of class and has a place of privilege but you know what your incredible chapter on language
[Amit Varma]: kind of brought home to me was how it plays across so many of these different languages
[Amit Varma]: like I'll quote from another part of your book where you speak about how it becomes difficult
[Amit Varma]: to even interface with the state if your first language is something else and you write quote
[Amit Varma]: it is bewildering even scary to get a notice from the government or the municipality
[Amit Varma]: and not be able to fully comprehend it. These are matters of life and death, being asked for
[Amit Varma]: proof of citizenship, procurement of land, tax areas, warnings to not venture into the forest
[Amit Varma]: or into the sea, information about free healthcare, supplementary diets, court summons, whoever
[Amit Varma]: controls language controls everything stop quote and elsewhere in the book you also wrote about
[Amit Varma]: you know how your grandmother I think would be scared of going to the bank because she wasn't
[Amit Varma]: familiar with the language in the form she might be you know incredibly natural and at ease in her
[Amit Varma]: own language but that's been given an inferior status so she's fumbling with this form and people
[Amit Varma]: are telling her to hurry up and it just becomes so intimidating and the other learning was that
[Amit Varma]: when Urdu was adopted as the national language of Pakistan it was actually not a language spoken
[Amit Varma]: there I mean the first language in all of the Pakistani states were different like in Punjab
[Amit Varma]: it was Punjabi and whatever and Urdu on the other hand not only originated in India in fact the only
[Amit Varma]: foreign part of its origin might be the Sanskrit influence because Sanskrit came from where Syria
[Amit Varma]: is today but you know there were riots in Bihar you pointed out when it was once officially
[Amit Varma]: announced as the second language there and all of that and it's just also incredibly political
[Amit Varma]: you've also written elsewhere about how once you were wearing a tabiz with Urdu on it and
[Amit Varma]: you realized while you were interviewing someone in a village that you know oh shit this tabiz is
[Amit Varma]: visible and you hid it and you know which was quite striking to me so is this sort of when do
[Amit Varma]: you start noticing this stuff because one of the things that struck me about your book and we'll
[Amit Varma]: discuss many different aspects of it is that while you know it's structured as a sort of a memoir
[Amit Varma]: what you're doing is when you're revisiting all of these places you're also seeing them with a
[Amit Varma]: new lens you know looking at language with a new lens or when you know talking about JK Puram
[Amit Varma]: about JK Puram where you examine how apt it is that is called a colony because what happened
[Amit Varma]: there is essentially colonization you know though many may not think of it that way and we'll delve
[Amit Varma]: into that as well but so did these lenses shift gradually over time or when you decided to write
[Amit Varma]: for it was that was that moment of examination a part of when you begin to look at things in a new
[Guest]: way i think one of the things with me is that i think through writing that i very rarely have
[Guest]: clear ideas about anything until i get into the writing so with regard to this book in particular
[Guest]: i had been thinking about some of these things for a while like i've been thinking about questions
[Guest]: of belonging identity place for a very long time even in in my first book for example
[Guest]: when my first non-fiction book i have this chapter on questions of identity and when i wrote that i
[Guest]: was much younger as maybe 15 years ago and it used to really trouble me how in india people are so
[Guest]: kind of unhesitating when it comes to asking you to define yourself and define yourself via either
[Guest]: region or caste or religion so this right out there what's your caste i mean i was so shocked
[Guest]: when that started to happen when i was out in my home what are you and i would say i'm a journalist
[Guest]: and they would be like no what are you and and they mean your religion and your caste of course
[Guest]: and i i i used to dodge that question initially just because it made me so uncomfortable and then
[Guest]: just out of a kind of uh zit just you know uh obstinacy that i will not answer that what you're
[Guest]: going to do i remember in a long conversation in in in a railway waiting room with this other woman
[Guest]: young woman she kept asking me what are you and i kept saying i don't know and she said how can you
[Guest]: not know and i said my parents never told me and she said but how is that even possible i said it's
[Guest]: possible i said it's possible so uh this was the sort of thing that i used to get into these
[Guest]: conversations early is to resist the idea of identities set in stone but over the years i
[Guest]: became more curious about what shapes them what shapes my identity actually if i actually had to
[Guest]: give an answer say how would i try and answer that and i found myself leaning more towards
[Guest]: language and what was regional affiliation and by regional i don't necessarily mean uh linguistic i
[Guest]: mean for example when i say regional i don't just mean up i mean eastern up you know i feel no
[Guest]: affiliation for western up and then where does this affiliation from eastern up come from it
[Guest]: comes from birth it comes from inheritance it comes from land it comes from stories have been
[Guest]: told about where my family comes from etc narratives a lot of affiliation comes from narrative and i
[Guest]: grew interested in that so i think that in the course of writing in the course of researching
[Guest]: things i was just blundering upon these different ideas and the more i struggled with these ideas
[Guest]: the more certain answers presented themselves or at least one way of interpreting those answers
[Guest]: and things sort of once you start opening up the chapter on women for example
[Guest]: was not something i was conceiving of at all i did not want to think of i most definitely identify as
[Guest]: a woman whether or not i identify as anything else there's no escaping that i am a woman and that's
[Guest]: not likely to change but um but i hadn't thought of womanhood itself as being um
[Guest]: a dislocated or very malleable identity in regional terms or even linguistic and cultural
[Guest]: terms i hadn't thought of it until i began the writing when i sat down and started talking to
[Guest]: people then i figured out that okay other women feel differently from me why do they feel that
[Guest]: ah that's because they're married or because their family backgrounds are different from mine they
[Guest]: don't have the choices that i have so i think that for me particularly at that moment comes when i'm
[Guest]: in the moment when i've already kind of put myself out there into the question and i'm casting about
[Guest]: for answers and looking to see what i can gather sometimes these more contentious and difficult
[Guest]: kind of ways of thinking about a particular topic suggest themselves at that time i very rarely plan
[Guest]: how i will approach a certain question or answer you've written very eloquently at different parts
[Amit Varma]: of the book about both identity and uh sort of the notion of home and i'll again quote from
[Amit Varma]: something that you say in one of your later chapters uh where you write quote that i grew
[Amit Varma]: into womanhood with the feeling of dispossession that i could not articulate is not surprising
[Amit Varma]: after all my body my city even my culture was not my own to inhabit obstinate and argumentative i
[Amit Varma]: was the opposite of most feminine virtues advertised in the matrimonial columns of the
[Amit Varma]: newspapers worse i was afraid that i might actually be persuaded seduce colded into in
[Amit Varma]: inhabiting those values and surrendering uh my selfhood how much did uh you know and what you
[Amit Varma]: said about you know sort of uh discovering what you think through writing is again resonant joan
[Amit Varma]: didion once said i don't know what i think until i write it down and you know when i kind of teach
[Amit Varma]: my writing course i also talk about how it's a two-way process it's not that you know something
[Amit Varma]: and then you write it sometimes writing is a way of knowing and finding out and as much about the
[Amit Varma]: self as otherwise now what i've kind of noticed about say our notions of the self is that a lot
[Amit Varma]: of it is about peeling away layers that stop us from seeing things like you made a short film
[Amit Varma]: about the color red about seeing red everywhere and i remember you spoke about that uh in an
[Amit Varma]: interview where you spoke about that how you imagined that mumbai was a city of grays but
[Amit Varma]: then you went around shooting red and you realized that they were just red everywhere
[Amit Varma]: and what happened what happened is that your previous lens was a particular kind of lens
[Amit Varma]: and you added a layer to it or you took away that layer which sort of didn't allow you to see red
[Amit Varma]: and you're seeing red everywhere and that struck me as a beautiful metaphor for how we evolve as
[Amit Varma]: people as well like i think for example for a lot of men there's one layer that never kind of goes
[Amit Varma]: away where they don't sort of realize uh the experience of women in the sense that you know
[Amit Varma]: if i get into a crowded lift with five men i don't feel anything but obviously when a woman does
[Amit Varma]: there is that added layer of self-awareness if you i can go out for a walk at night without
[Amit Varma]: thinking twice about it but even in a safe city like bombay i would imagine that you know there
[Amit Varma]: is that layer of alertness that women have that's one layer then they can be kind of layers of caste
[Amit Varma]: which you peel away layers of privilege you don't realize whether they are your class layers of
[Amit Varma]: language where just you know being able to speak in english with you know a sarkari person
[Amit Varma]: automatically kind of in a sense you are saying that hey you know you know i could be someone who
[Amit Varma]: could have influence and get you into trouble or whatever and over time and most people don't become
[Amit Varma]: aware of these layers and i would imagine that as a writer uh you know you are more likely to
[Amit Varma]: sort of especially if you're doing the kind of writing that you're doing which goes into the
[Amit Varma]: territory of personal essays and uh fiction and all of that that you're more likely to kind of
[Amit Varma]: peel those away so when you when you look at say the young annie the 20 year old annie as it were
[Amit Varma]: and uh you know you today what do you think are those sort of big moments those big learnings
[Guest]: the layers that are gone god i was so clueless at 20 just i cannot imagine a more clueless person
[Guest]: at 20 see one thing about me was that um i did not grow up in big cities i did not even grow up in
[Guest]: small cities i grew up in this little way out place and then when i did go to college i went
[Guest]: to a town a small town which made but i went to a girl's hostel and it was very very strict
[Guest]: you were not allowed out except once or twice a month and that was for maybe two or three hours
[Guest]: and that was it and if you stepped out at all even on those once or twice a month occasions
[Guest]: you need to have a legitimate excuse so you needed to say why you were going out it wasn't enough to
[Guest]: say i want to go out never you needed to say i'm going to visit my local garden i'm going to visit
[Guest]: a doctor i'm you know i need to buy some essentials you know i need to buy books i need to
[Guest]: whatever it was you needed to have a good excuse to do that and because of that my experience of
[Guest]: urban life is extremely limited like even what i knew of Ajmer was next to nothing really i knew
[Guest]: Lucknow because from family visits and holidays but you obviously are not allowed to go out on
[Guest]: your own then you don't have your own money you don't know how to negotiate public transport so
[Guest]: you know that that experience is completely different i think when i moved finally to Bombay
[Guest]: Bombay as it was by that time when i moved back here i the city itself was a very shocking
[Guest]: experience for one you know just the scale of it the crowds the having to negotiate everything you
[Guest]: know like it wasn't just that you were negotiating an income you were negotiating every single thing
[Guest]: negotiating the buses negotiating the trains negotiating the platforms negotiating the
[Guest]: staircases and i think that for the first couple of years all my experience is kind of
[Guest]: jammed into i cannot separate one strand of experience from the other i do have this one
[Guest]: very clear memory and this is from when i was younger actually i mentioned one of these
[Guest]: experiences in the book where when i used to wear shalwar kameez typically in the north when you
[Guest]: wear shalwar kameez you also wear a dupatta and it is not necessarily for the sake of modesty
[Guest]: it's often just decorative but you know i used to wear it around my neck and i in in bombay's
[Guest]: local women's compartment the pattas of the dupatta the the the loose ends of the dupatta
[Guest]: had got trapped between other women and i was trying to get off and the women getting on
[Guest]: and i was almost strangled because you know there was one group of women pushing me out there was
[Guest]: this became an actual noose around my neck and then i started noticing that nobody wears dupattas
[Guest]: the women here don't wear things around their neck and then i started to pay close attention
[Guest]: and i saw that when women get onto the trains get off the trains they often take a scarf or
[Guest]: dupatta out of their handbags and then they wear them once they're done with the crowds once they're
[Guest]: sitting in cabs once they're entering the offices that's when they do it and for me that was a
[Guest]: revelation that oh okay this is how it works these are working women in the fullest sense that you
[Guest]: know they're not just women who you know can have their home lives but also their external feminine
[Guest]: selves and they occupy in other towns that was how it worked that you know whatever that
[Guest]: you dressed in in a feminine manner whatever that femininity was and uh you occupied it very fully
[Guest]: but it wasn't like that in mumbai you constantly negotiated even that because it could become
[Guest]: something dangerous and these were the little ways in which i began to understand that
[Guest]: whatever i am whatever i have learned as a child as a young girl as a teenager will have to slowly
[Guest]: be if not completely given up will have to constantly be tested for context so the problem
[Guest]: is not the dupatta the problem is the context a crowded train is the context and similarly i found
[Guest]: that everything else about my life became more and more contextual um growing up as an indian
[Guest]: middle class child i should say not just woman particularly a girl but you know i mean i think
[Guest]: this applies to men too your ideas morality are so set so fixed going to a police station was
[Guest]: considered a bad thing because who hangs around in courts and police stations you know people
[Guest]: who've done wrong things or people who are in trouble and you definitely don't want to be
[Guest]: somebody who's in trouble so but when i was a journalist once i became a journalist and that
[Guest]: was my job i had to do it i had to do the rounds of the police stations and the courts and and
[Guest]: understand that life is so hard for people it is so hard and i had no idea it was this hard
[Guest]: and i come from a not very privileged background i mean i i was more or less single-parented
[Guest]: my mother didn't have much money we grew up in these tiny places we didn't have our own vehicles
[Guest]: all of that i needed a job it wasn't that i was working just fun needed the job but i had no idea
[Guest]: that life was this hard for so many people i think journalism taught me that and i think that
[Guest]: introduced me first to to whatever little privilege i had it wasn't a lot it was very
[Guest]: like we just were barely surviving in the city and i thought that was hard but then you go out
[Guest]: there then you see that my god life is hard for others you go to public hospitals and you see the
[Guest]: conditions of those hospitals and i think many of my ideas about not only about what makes people
[Guest]: do the things they do you know in either a moral sense or just you know in a social sense those
[Guest]: things started to fall away i had grown up with a slight suspicion which i think a lot of kids
[Guest]: grew up with a slight suspicion of leftist politics even though my grandfather had been
[Guest]: or at least in his youth for a few years he was socialist and that's in his memoir etc
[Guest]: but in general around me all conversations were like
[Guest]: that he is a socialist, he is a communist so you know the the suspicion of ways of thinking
[Guest]: which were on the left was even without my knowledge i had no idea if you'd ask me as a
[Guest]: 21 year old what is your politics like i don't know i don't know what left is i don't know what
[Guest]: right is but once i actually went out there i began to become aware not only firstly about
[Guest]: the awareness of being political that you have to be political you cannot completely cut yourself
[Guest]: off from everything around you and say that oh i'm apolitical that was the preserve of the
[Guest]: extremely privileged i understood that very quickly i also understood very quickly that
[Guest]: when people say things like you know oh those people like i keep slipping back into hindi
[Guest]: because you know that's the conversation around me but uh people say things like you know amongst
[Amit Varma]: those people these things happen it's it's actually okay to slip into hindi i think my
[Guest]: listeners will get it like okay all right something like that yeah something like that
[Guest]: like you know the poor don't want to study they don't want to get ahead in life
[Guest]: and those are the kind of things which you absorb without you don't really question that very much
[Guest]: and then when i went when i actually went out there and i saw how hard people work to just get
[Guest]: a chance at education there are women holding down three or four or eight different jobs
[Guest]: to be able to put their kids through school and and they trust that that will somehow lift them
[Guest]: out of poverty save them from the worst things that they're out there there were a lot of things
[Guest]: a lot of things out there i remember when i was one of my assignments i was sent off to
[Guest]: cover a raid on a brother in i was working in midday at the time and it was just one of those
[Guest]: things where i mean one i didn't even tell my family that i'm going to do it because i mean
[Guest]: what do you tell them i think i would have been sucked into the kind of confrontation i could not
[Guest]: afford to have at the time but even from my own point of view i of course it it was extremely
[Guest]: frightening extremely frightening just the idea of even when you're going with the police it's
[Guest]: accompanying a police team i wasn't going on my own but the idea of being a woman going into a
[Guest]: space which i understood instinctively to be hostile to women i mean these were sex workers
[Guest]: yes and some of them may be voluntary sex workers but i understood it to be intrinsically hostile
[Guest]: to the women and i was very frightened and uh i remember thinking that this was a
[Guest]: quote-unquote not nice thing i'm doing you know like nice girls even for their work they don't
[Guest]: go to brothers like what is this what am i doing here in the middle of the night with these cops
[Guest]: and who hangs out with cops anyway you know um and i remember having all these questions in my
[Guest]: mind but i'd actually never seen an actual sex worker in my life before and this is true of i
[Guest]: think women in particular men might notice or men might even you know enter into a conversation with
[Guest]: the sex worker because that is the nature of the transaction but for women particularly
[Guest]: quote-unquote nice you know or respectable whatever that means the idea of respectability
[Guest]: was something i had not challenged as a 2021 just took it for granted that yeah i'm respectable and
[Guest]: you have to hold on to this idea of your respectability but i did know quite certainly
[Guest]: that respectability is constantly under attack that even if you are somebody from a quote-unquote
[Guest]: respectable family your respectability is constantly under attack it is constantly being
[Guest]: threatened premarital sex can threaten it photos of you uh you know nude photos of you can threaten
[Guest]: it anybody makes a random comment about you that can threaten it somebody goes to your parents and
[Guest]: says oh we saw this girl sitting so and so at that time and with a boy and then that threatens it
[Guest]: if you're seen smoking then that threatens your idea of whether or not you're respectable all
[Guest]: these things i knew and i knew that you have to at all times guard against any the smallest assault
[Guest]: upon your respectability because then your life could be ruined etc etc and then here i was then
[Guest]: doing this thing attending a raid uh where you were looking for underage girls and that one night
[Guest]: and that one night i have to say that so much just fell away uh first my ideas about because
[Guest]: these were just things i'd seen in movies you know never never actually met someone but then i go in
[Guest]: and i see that there are all these girls they're dressed up and they're being picked out by somebody
[Guest]: who's pretending to be a client but is actually a cop and then i saw the cops beating up some of
[Guest]: the men who were possibly workers pimps or whoever they were procurers and then i sat down with some
[Guest]: of those girls while the raid was underway because what else could i do i had nowhere else to go my
[Guest]: job was just to sit and watch what was happening um i'm sitting with those girls and i was clearly
[Guest]: upset i i don't think i was like bawling or anything but i was upset enough that even the
[Guest]: cops noticed and they turned around and somebody said that you know somebody take this girl away
[Guest]: because she's going to start crying any minute now and then some of these girls the sex workers
[Guest]: took me away they took me to another room and they allowed the raid to progress as it was progressing
[Guest]: and they thought for some reason i don't know why maybe they picked up on my fear or whatever it was
[Guest]: they sat me down they held my hands and they said didi koi baat nahi and it was just so ridiculous
[Guest]: because they were the ones who were suffering the raid the cops were going to i mean nothing was
[Guest]: going to happen to me i was going to go back home at the end of that night um and even as a 21 22
[Guest]: maybe a year old i was aware of this irony that this is absolutely stupid why are these girls
[Guest]: holding my hand and telling me ki didi you know uh you don't worry i mean i should be the one
[Guest]: telling them that didi you don't worry they're younger to me they were 17 years old 18 years old
[Guest]: many of them were minors they ended up doing the tests and finding that these 16 15 year old girls
[Guest]: i think a lot of my biases crumpled immediately in that moment every bias i had held about
[Guest]: what kind of woman deserves to be treated in what way that in that one night that collapsed
[Guest]: completely i also remember thinking that about the nature of policing for the first time because it
[Guest]: was first time i had seen anyone hit a grown man you know when you come from families where
[Guest]: you don't i mean i had seen violence like in school i had seen violence kids getting beaten
[Guest]: up i'd never seen a grown man be beaten up i saw that that randomly cops just seeing a man and one
[Guest]: top and he could be a client or he could be a one of the people who procures women whoever he was i
[Guest]: don't know it was a very big shock but i also remember thinking that the cops aren't supposed
[Guest]: to do this this is not how policing is supposed to work you know maybe they've done something
[Guest]: wrong arrest them take down their statements etc etc i think my ideas about how the police functions
[Guest]: also changed that day i began to understand that that that things don't happen the way
[Guest]: they're supposed to and that the things i've seen and read in movies and read in books
[Guest]: are not the way real life is was introduced to real life so to speak and i was also introduced
[Guest]: to and once you start questioning the things you've inherited the respectability bias that
[Guest]: you've inherited then you start questioning everything else i think for me that was like that
[Amit Varma]: that one night i will never forget and i've actually uh you know there's a talk on youtube
[Amit Varma]: where you also spoke about that one night and it's very cinematic actually that image of you
[Amit Varma]: sitting on a bed being consoled by the girls your theme the context in which you brought this up
[Amit Varma]: was again something that i'd like you to elaborate on because it's very interesting to me about a
[Amit Varma]: journey that journalists should take but some may not which is discovering the difference between
[Amit Varma]: facts and the truth that when you are a journalist you're reporting you're going out you're getting
[Amit Varma]: facts you're taking quotes this happened so and so said this so and so said that but there's a
[Amit Varma]: layer behind it that is a truth and i presume you mentioned this story because you know uh some of
[Amit Varma]: the facts fall away and some of the truth comes out and uh you you see those layers now i would
[Amit Varma]: imagine that then like once this happens a switch has gone off it's never going back again you're
[Amit Varma]: never only going to look at facts again you're going to look for truth and your notion of what
[Amit Varma]: the truth is will then evolve with time and what the kind of stories that you do the kind of work
[Amit Varma]: that you do will be predicated on that uh on uh you know that evolving kind of frame of the world
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a bit about one the different directions of your thought as all of this happens and two how
[Amit Varma]: you start thinking about the kind of work that you want to do because very soon you go beyond
[Amit Varma]: journalism you of course were one of the early bloggers uh like me back in the day uh is that
[Amit Varma]: something that freed you in different ways and helped you explore subjects you would otherwise
[Amit Varma]: not be able to write about and then on to fiction drama all of that what was that kind of journey
[Amit Varma]: like and that distinction between facts and truth how how hard it is to even define uh what truth is
[Amit Varma]: because i think what most of us do is the world is too complex to figure out every aspect of it
[Amit Varma]: right so you adopt a lens and you look at it and it could be a gray lens and bombay looks gray
[Amit Varma]: and suddenly you take away the filter that hides the red and how you see the red also
[Amit Varma]: so what is that process like do you keep examining your biases and your lenses and your frames
[Guest]: i kind of do and i think my early journalistic training had a lot to do with it i think i got
[Guest]: really lucky especially that one and a half year that i spent at midday i think i just gave the
[Guest]: example of the raid but i did a bunch of things like that my editor at the time was akar patel
[Guest]: and there's a big one for just go out there and check what's happening just see what happened
[Guest]: like that so for example i'll give you another example um this was one of the major stories i
[Guest]: did where somebody wanted something done about the rights of the disabled right people who are
[Guest]: differently abled or disabled in the city now how do you write about that one way of saying is
[Guest]: just to say that okay you know the city doesn't do enough and leave it at that but he said okay
[Guest]: go put yourself in a wheelchair and figure out what it's like so i spent the day traveling
[Guest]: around the city as a disabled person so one of the first things that happens is obviously
[Guest]: my own filters come crashing down right because i had never thought about what it's like for
[Guest]: people who are in a wheelchair what is the city like because you are abled you just take it for
[Guest]: granted that the city is fine right what's wrong with the set of staircases i mean um and even if
[Guest]: you do know that okay so people in wheelchairs can't go here so then you say well if they can't
[Guest]: they can't and you shrug it off and you don't think more once i did that i started to see so
[Guest]: many things in so many different ways not just that you can't climb a flight of stairs so okay
[Guest]: maybe you can't get from platform number one to platform number five maybe it's difficult
[Guest]: then you find that even if you get to platform number five the gap between the train and the
[Guest]: platform is too big and you can't actually you know the train doesn't stop long enough for you
[Guest]: to get off the wheelchair fold up the wheelchair put the wheelchair on even if you have people
[Guest]: helping you that won't happen then you see you can't enter cinemas then you see you can't enter
[Guest]: eating spaces then you see that something else even if you need to go to a doctor in a taxi
[Guest]: the taxis aren't big enough mostly to hold a wheelchair so i had the photographer with me
[Guest]: who was playing along pretending that i was actually in a wheelchair and he was having to
[Guest]: pick me up and carry me and put me in the cab and then fold my wheelchair and the taxi driver
[Guest]: was very concerned because that once you fold up the wheelchair it doesn't fit into the back of the
[Guest]: taxi all the different ways in which the city is not meant it is not designed for people who are
[Guest]: different from the norm and then also to become aware that that person could be me i am able today
[Guest]: but i could be disabled tomorrow something could happen it could be temporary or it could be
[Guest]: permanent i could grow old the city is not designed for the elderly and most cities aren't
[Guest]: so in all these different ways i think i was constantly being pushed right to see that okay
[Guest]: how long does this happen when you call the police station how long how many rings before somebody
[Guest]: picks up these were all the different ways in which i was being exposed i think for me also
[Guest]: it was a lot of exposure intense exposure of somebody who had been so under exposed like
[Guest]: within two years this much exposure was a bit much also and i think that those two or three
[Guest]: four years of early journalism really did shape and unshape me quite a bit after that i think but
[Guest]: however this creative urge was there within me i think even when i quit my first reporting job
[Guest]: i quit it thinking that this is too intense i want to sit at home and write poetry and of course
[Guest]: within a month i learned my lesson because writing poetry does not pay the bills and i had to go back
[Guest]: of course and find a job but this creative urge also was there and that one month when i did
[Guest]: sit home and write poetry all the new things i had learned the things that i did not have time for
[Guest]: the course of a regular reporting life the ways in which my poetry was changing the ways in which
[Guest]: i was changing and learning to see the world in a different way um that i had time to process
[Guest]: and sit down and maybe write a couple of new poems and then go back and then write in different ways
[Guest]: so i was always doing that i think and and i kept quitting and kept going back because i
[Guest]: didn't have much of an option but i think by the time i was around 24-25 it was clear to me that i
[Guest]: also want more that i don't want just journalism i want to do more i want to tell other stories
[Guest]: stories that i cannot tell as journalists by the time i started blogging it was around i think end
[Guest]: of 2004-2005 i knew journalism enough to know that most things that i'm thinking and feeling
[Guest]: are not going to make it into the copy even if you're writing for a magazine and so you've got
[Guest]: more words you don't have to stop at 300 words you can write say 2000 words but you're still not
[Guest]: going to be able to write the truth as i experience it and see it and the many layers of truth so for
[Guest]: example something as simple as i'll give you an example of what delhi feels like after it's rained
[Guest]: in the morning right um i was in delhi i'd moved to delhi by that time
[Guest]: now if i'm a reporter say a normal you know regular city reporter i can just say unseasonal
[Guest]: rain at delhi and so and so time whatever whatever and or traffic stopped or you know if traffic
[Guest]: doesn't stop and if it's not unseasonal then why will you write about it raining right it rained
[Guest]: so that's two words what does that convey to the reader does it convey anything of beauty
[Guest]: does it convey um that particular way in which you're learning to see the city it's the air is
[Guest]: just a little crisper a little cleaner and there's dew everywhere or all surfaces are wet and the
[Guest]: quality and texture i became interested in capturing that too because that is also a
[Guest]: different kind of truth a different kind of experience reality and i found that blogging
[Guest]: gave me that freedom there's nowhere else i could do it even for free there was no other space out
[Guest]: there there were no other lit journals that would just publish me talking about how i'm thinking
[Guest]: or feeling about a certain morning a certain moment in time and blogging allowed me to do that
[Guest]: it also allowed me to talk about the story behind the story so i write the story for the magazine
[Guest]: but also then i get to write about what the train journey was like that i couldn't get
[Guest]: reservation and this is what it felt like or or the kind of conversations you overhear in budget
[Guest]: hotels and i found that interesting i wanted to capture that too and so i think blogging then
[Guest]: became the next way i started to be formed as a writer as a writer of prose particularly that
[Guest]: it was crucial to me learning how to put experience and words together and capture
[Guest]: different kinds of truths and and try and make sense of the world around me
[Guest]: and then rama i think came after one more leap i had done some more journalism particularly in
[Guest]: rural areas for i think three three and a half years and i had just started to write my first
[Guest]: non-fiction book my collection of essays and around then i thought that okay it's time for
[Guest]: another break so i'm going to sweep up all my savings whatever little saving i have i'm going
[Guest]: to withdraw all my pf and i decided to give myself one year in which i'm going to just write
[Guest]: that you know just don't worry you're paying the bills for one year give yourself 12 months of not
[Guest]: worrying about paying the bills and so then i moved back into my mother's home and for one year
[Guest]: i just wrote and one of the things that i was doing at this time was i was trying to make sense
[Guest]: of a kind of social politics or the the politics of ordinary people around me
[Guest]: in ways that i couldn't through journalism or even through prose you know i these were things
[Guest]: that i sensed but could not say i can't point a finger or i can't take a photo of these things
[Guest]: right so for example one of the first plays i wrote uh was just i was just thinking about
[Guest]: certain aspects of life one of them was about domestic staff in india most middle class people
[Guest]: have domestic staff not always live in stuff but almost everybody employs mates if they can afford
[Guest]: it and labor is cheap so many more people employ me and we grew up without too much interaction
[Guest]: with domestic staff it was very limited um but in my friend's homes or wherever i was you know
[Guest]: ultimately i also began to hire people when i became a worker and in my friend's homes
[Guest]: particularly those who live in stuff slightly more privileged people uh they could afford
[Guest]: to have someone stay constantly i began to notice the ways in which and these were mostly often
[Guest]: young girls young women to look at their lives and think about their lives and what are their
[Guest]: lives like and what are their options and the ways in which living in someone else's house where you
[Guest]: also work where there's no separation of workspace and home space what happens then in that environment
[Guest]: to those girls so i started to think about this and i knew that i didn't want to do this as an
[Guest]: essay or as a report that there's something else i'm getting at but i didn't know what
[Guest]: but i had a lot of conversations in my mind like things i'd overheard dialogues bits of dialogue
[Guest]: so i began by just writing that down that okay i remember this exchange uh between two people now
[Guest]: what happens if i take these two dialogues and i take these two characters and i open it out
[Guest]: will some other thing reveal itself and it did it turned into another thing because as you keep
[Guest]: writing those characters take on life and then they start doing things that you have not seen
[Guest]: that you move beyond uh the reality that you see into an imagined world where you also capture a
[Guest]: certain reality and where that reality comes from you don't know but it's there and you kind of know
[Guest]: that yes this is true but i cannot present it as fiction as non-fiction i cannot say that this is
[Guest]: the truth so i call it fiction but i know deep down that this is truth that's that's fascinating
[Amit Varma]: fascinating a quick aside before i go to my next question and the aside is that story you did
[Amit Varma]: sitting on a wheelchair mind-blowing idea and and you know akar did things like that i remember back
[Amit Varma]: in the day uh so uh credit to him as well i think people have forgotten that editor side of him you
[Amit Varma]: know i did a workshop with him for uh my uh writing students and i i if i remember correctly he
[Amit Varma]: mentioned in it how he no longer wants to be an editor that that is in the past and all of that
[Amit Varma]: which i think is a little bit of a loss because he would be able to mentor so many young people
[Amit Varma]: so well but but the aside really is that this is uh you know i had chris ashok um a few weeks back
[Amit Varma]: on my show uh talking about the book he's written on food science and we were talking about how we
[Amit Varma]: experience podcasts and he listens to my show at 3x that's three times the speed and he mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that he started listening at higher speeds because a friend of his who was visually disabled who was
[Amit Varma]: blind would listen at 6x so i tried to take it up to 6x and i couldn't make anything out
[Amit Varma]: and then if you just close your eyes and listen at 6x you get a sense of what that experience is
[Amit Varma]: like that how they have had to develop this facility because that other part of theirs
[Amit Varma]: which we take for granted which is sight is simply not there and there was recently something that
[Amit Varma]: netflix did which people mocked you can now watch something on netflix at either half speed or
[Amit Varma]: double speeds and all of that and you know people like us and and our first instinct is that why
[Amit Varma]: you want to watch at normal speed but the reason they did that is because the blind people they
[Amit Varma]: watch netflix in a sense by listening to a visual description of what's going on and because the
[Amit Varma]: brain can take in uh you know up to 500 words a minute while we speak at 150 they want the
[Amit Varma]: higher speeds and the people who want the lower speeds are um you know those who can't hear so
[Amit Varma]: they are looking at the subtitles and therefore they need it to be slower because the reading
[Amit Varma]: speed is slower so it's it's such a what at first seems unnecessary to people like us who take all
[Amit Varma]: of this for granted take our experiences for granted brilliant move on the part of netflix i
[Amit Varma]: think now what i also wanted to sort of look at and i've been thinking about it a bit is about
[Amit Varma]: you know back in the day even we bloggers didn't think of blogging as something that is incredibly
[Amit Varma]: serious or will change who we are but the more i think about it one i think that what blogging does
[Amit Varma]: is that one of course as you mentioned it gives you the freedom that you're not bound by form or
[Amit Varma]: house style or theme or whatever you can go in different directions you can write one para you
[Amit Varma]: can write 50 paras but the other thing it does is that not only do you go off in all these different
[Amit Varma]: directions because you are not self-conscious because what you are writing is only a blog
[Amit Varma]: and you give yourself the freedom to experiment you iterate a lot like i did you know when i was
[Amit Varma]: active i did more than 8 000 posts i think whatever the quality of those might have been
[Amit Varma]: it's only constant iteration that makes you better and therefore and my other sort of speculation
[Amit Varma]: there is i wrote a post on this recently that the form in which whatever your artistic form
[Amit Varma]: is or your form of creativity is the form shapes the content and the content shapes you
[Amit Varma]: so if i did a five minute conversation with you for example i would not really need to read your
[Amit Varma]: book or know anything about you i could just ask you know four snappy questions and the whole thing
[Amit Varma]: would be very shallow if i do something much longer i have to read everything you've written
[Amit Varma]: i have to really work at it whatever the subject is in forcing myself to do that to bring about
[Amit Varma]: the content that suits the form i am also changing as a person so now when i look at your journey
[Amit Varma]: and you've of course been much braver than me in the sense you haven't held back you just got into
[Amit Varma]: drama and filmmaking and stories and you just did everything which i can't tell you how much i admire
[Amit Varma]: because i think a lot of factors hold people back from doing that such as confidence to begin with
[Amit Varma]: but did exploring all these different forms did they start changing you and the kind of
[Amit Varma]: explorations you made and the kind of writer you eventually became i mean starting with blogging
[Guest]: of course but all of these other things with the phrase fools rush in comes to my mind you know i
[Guest]: am a bit of a fool in that sense that i do tend to rush into certain things i think one of the
[Guest]: things about me is also that i i constantly like to test and learn so i i have this great thirst
[Guest]: for novelty i like new things and i've never been for example i never read in one particular genre
[Guest]: or format even reading wise i never read all the works of one writer and i think it is mainly that
[Guest]: that once i've done something and i see something new there's this great desire to see that can i do
[Guest]: this too let me try i might fail but let me try so i always want to do it i mean like a couple of
[Guest]: years ago i even wrote a chatbot script and i'm in principle like i dislike chatbots in general but
[Guest]: but well it was a project and they said can you do scripts i said well yes i can do scripts so
[Guest]: if i can do scripts i can do this too why not let me do it let me do it once at least let me try
[Guest]: so um i think that for me it is one of the things is that i do really like being tested uh in that
[Guest]: way i don't like being judged necessarily but i do like being tested in that fashion um i'll try
[Guest]: um i'll try most things once you know to see that okay what's the worst that could happen i'll fail
[Guest]: and that's fine so from a creative viewpoint i'm not afraid of failure this has helped me in many
[Guest]: ways because even within something like poetry for example at one point we were doing this
[Guest]: napo raimo things which is the national poetry writing month national for the u.s not for us but
[Guest]: uh we just kind of appropriated that um so the challenge is to write 30 poems in 30 days and at
[Guest]: one point we also began to as a collective we were doing that the writers collective through
[Guest]: gafferati at one point i also said started setting exercises and that included myself
[Guest]: set myself exercises and say that today write a villanelle today write a sonnet today write
[Guest]: a sestina these are difficult things to do you know but you try and you do it and mostly turns
[Guest]: out bad like if you've written 30 poems chances are there'll be three good ones maybe two mediocre
[Guest]: ones and the rest will be just absolute rubbish and you have to be prepared to just toss them out
[Guest]: and say so i wrote 20 bad poems so what um but like you were saying about iteration writing those 20
[Guest]: bad poems enables you to write the two good ones and i i was learning that and i think one of the
[Guest]: other things i've noticed is because i'm also kind of i've always had one foot in journalism and then
[Guest]: one foot out and then one foot back in and one foot out journalism because of the nature of the
[Guest]: job because you're so exposed to so much of the world to other people's experiences etc at some
[Guest]: at some point i always want to stop and take a breath and see what was what was that what is this
[Guest]: how do i think about this is it enough to just write what i've written and then leave it at that
[Guest]: and then and then do i not push further to see what this experience actually means in a creative
[Guest]: way so i think a lot of that was happening a lot of what i was learning through research and
[Guest]: journalism was then being after i've done the early work of the report or whatever it is like
[Guest]: a year later two years later it's still stewing in my mind i'm still trying to figure out or two
[Guest]: different ideas suddenly come together and you see that okay you need to write this but in a new
[Guest]: format that this needs to become a play or this needs to become a poem um for a while i was doing
[Guest]: this thing and i still try and do it so not very successfully but for a while i was picking up
[Guest]: newspaper headlines at some point i got really frustrated and i continue to remain frustrated
[Guest]: by how much the news hides you know you work in the news you've been in the media you you're partly
[Guest]: responsible for creating this thing but as much as it is about telling the truth it's also about
[Guest]: not telling the truth and i became for a while quite obsessed with that that idea that um that
[Guest]: this newspaper report is not telling the truth at all it's actually helping me not see the truth
[Guest]: rather than see the truth so i began to write pick up newspaper headlines which i felt were
[Guest]: either ineffective or concealing something or just or just picking up random headlines and
[Guest]: then seeing that okay how can i twist this around to actually reveal a fuller truth about society
[Guest]: in some way so i took the headline and the headline remained the same but the rest of my
[Guest]: poem was a response to that headline to try and convey what is being hidden give me some examples
[Amit Varma]: of headlines like that which sort of hide more than they reveal i mean i'm sure all headlines
[Guest]: at some level are like that but can i just read you a poem please please do okay so i'll give you
[Guest]: one headline which was two palestinians shot dead after attacking israelis so i i saw this headline
[Guest]: then obviously it is it is a factual headline and there's no denying that two in whatever
[Guest]: whatever incident it was i've forgotten the year maybe maybe four or five years ago
[Guest]: they it was a knife attack and i read the report and i i thought that this headline conveys
[Guest]: something it conveys violence but it also conceals so much violence and then i wrote this poem in
[Guest]: response two people armed with knives were killed after they separately rushed towards
[Guest]: different groups of israelis armed with guns two people set out from home or whatever remained of
[Guest]: that feeling called home it is unclear if they kissed anyone goodbye but preliminary imaginings
[Guest]: indicate they held that thought a while it is unclear if their homes had been bombed or if any
[Guest]: children died in the shelling it is unclear whether they rebuilt or relocated and if they had whether
[Guest]: they were bombed a second time it is clear that they had access to kitchen knives it is clear
[Guest]: they rushed towards wielders of guns it is clear the guns would be used the color of their skin
[Guest]: is clear their olive trees their pets their throaty mother tongue their last words were not so clear
[Amit Varma]: so that's the poem lovely thank you so much that's quite uh moving do you sorry i actually
[Amit Varma]: interrupted you when i asked you to give an example so why don't you finish your thought
[Guest]: and then i'll continue um no so so there's another one which was sillier there's another one um
[Guest]: called um all eyes on hsc results and then i thought this is such a silly headlines obviously
[Guest]: all eyes are not on hsc results not just the eyes of children and parents maybe other eyes are doing
[Guest]: other things so then i wrote a kind of slightly a teasing kind of love poem in response that
[Guest]: eyes have other jobs also rather than look at hsc results so you want to read that out as well
[Guest]: uh okay why not i'll read that one out as well too so all eyes on hsc results is the headline
[Guest]: and the poem is how many eyes are trained on the higher secondary exam results hard to say
[Guest]: but eyes are slitted sleek with yesterday's failing eyes follow monkey eyes gibbering
[Guest]: through a bazaar rubbing neon out of the black lids of night eyes are fixed upon a street gone
[Guest]: gray with too much going away lost foundlings blinded by concrete eyes wait on the road divider
[Guest]: holding the skeleton of a bunch of red roses that grazed the shin of passerby who looked
[Guest]: but saw nothing except a flower pot that he used as a spittoon eyes are intent on some assured
[Guest]: insurance plans and a new toughy car bought by a semi-friendly neighbor with good skin
[Guest]: eyes are careening wildly between cat matt grety bsc upsc pmt pt net yet most days they're fixed
[Guest]: upon the luminous face of a phd guide who won a gold medal for every exam he ever sat
[Guest]: and he comes to uni in blue fleece and real leather sandals lovely but tell me no you are
[Amit Varma]: also being unfair to headline writer because how is a headline writer supposed to fit all that in
[Amit Varma]: but uh so is it the case like you've you've pointed out elsewhere in your book about how
[Amit Varma]: language can play a subversive part in how we see the world for example you talk about going
[Amit Varma]: to this court trial of a gentleman whose daughter had been murdered and it took you a while to
[Amit Varma]: figure out that his daughter had been murdered because the lawyers are kept using the term
[Amit Varma]: hadsa as if you know something had happened to her and i'm reminded i'll quote a little
[Amit Varma]: bit of something jackson katz said a few years ago about how violence against women is reported
[Amit Varma]: where he writes quote we talk about how many women were raped last year not about how many
[Amit Varma]: men raped women we talk about how many girls in a school district were harris last year not about
[Amit Varma]: how many boys had his girls we talk about how many teenage girls got pregnant in the state of
[Amit Varma]: vermont last year rather than how many men and teenage boys got girls pregnant so you can see
[Amit Varma]: how the use of this passive voice has a political effect it shifts the focus of men and boys and
[Amit Varma]: onto girls and women even the term violence against women is problematic it's a passive
[Amit Varma]: construction there is no active agent in the sentence uh stop quote and and this is a uniform
[Amit Varma]: example but is it then the case that if one gets a little mindful you can see similar perversions
[Amit Varma]: or similar ways in which language obfuscates what's really happening out there where it might
[Amit Varma]: you know in the like in the two headlines you pointed out it might be stating a fact but hiding
[Guest]: the truth yes absolutely i agree with you and in the case of women and patriarchal language it is
[Guest]: most evident but in almost every other way too so for example one of these this is one of my pet
[Guest]: peeves this word growth and the other pet peeve is this word development i am so annoyed at people
[Guest]: who do not challenge this growth in what like in real terms in actual terms you break down this
[Guest]: idea notion of growth into your personal life what will it mean right i remember once going
[Guest]: to do a story in in a rural area where people were protesting the impact of a particular plant
[Guest]: because of the pollution right it was destroying their lives it was destroying their plants and
[Guest]: so on so forth water sources were getting contaminated and then i went to the factory
[Guest]: that was doing the polluting and there was this man and i was quite young at the time and i did
[Guest]: pat the language and and the ideas and and the experience with which to frame my thoughts and
[Guest]: argue with him and as a journalist it wasn't really my place also to argue it was just to hear
[Guest]: him out but but i felt argued with you know because he was quite aggressive and and one of
[Guest]: the things he said that madam what is development and i said you tell me what is development and
[Guest]: then he patted this pocket you know this front pocket that men's shirts have and he then he said
[Guest]: then he said that i have 500 rupees in this this is development right that i should always have
[Guest]: 500 rupees here that is development you don't have it there is no development and i remember
[Guest]: thinking that there's something wrong about this argument but i didn't know how to say what is
[Guest]: wrong so i didn't argue at the time and obviously uh if i had just spoken to the people who were
[Guest]: protesting in more detail they would have given me the language their language and later i read
[Guest]: more about this i read this uh now it is quite famous actually this letter that one of the people
[Guest]: who were protesting the narmada da one of the farm leaders and you know he wrote a letter
[Guest]: and he wrote about displacement from this perspective that he said that you know you
[Guest]: speak about the gains that somebody will make whatever and what will be replaced you know you
[Guest]: will be given a piece of land somewhere else in exchange for whatever but do you know what i have
[Guest]: here and then he listed all the different kinds of foods that he has access to where he is
[Guest]: and that is not seen as when you speak of money and development what what is money it's a piece
[Guest]: of paper right but what it does is it gives you access to other things so for us in urban areas
[Guest]: it gives you access to you know the ability to rent places for example and you think of money
[Guest]: in those terms because it is enabling that but for somebody else in another context they
[Guest]: already have land and they can build their own houses they don't need you to come and build
[Guest]: the houses for them so that you can then buy or rent those houses so they don't need you
[Guest]: and whatever your idea of this so-called quote-unquote development is right uh that can
[Guest]: buy them all these things choice of food we think of okay when you develop in life when you have
[Guest]: growth in life you have so many options choice is one of the most expensive things there is right
[Guest]: the ability to go out there and then choose do you want to eat this or do you want to eat that
[Guest]: you have an option of 15 different things and that is what a good life is but if somebody already
[Guest]: lives in a place where he already has access to 15 things and they're all free or things he can
[Guest]: grow himself he doesn't need you to give him that and who are you then to say surrender all this
[Guest]: sign up for some other system where you will have none of this and then work in the ways we are
[Guest]: telling you to work and then maybe you will have a choice of three different things to eat
[Guest]: um it is just absolutely horrific that we allow these terms like development growth gdp what does
[Guest]: gdp actually mean break it down for the people in ways that it affects them you know their lives uh
[Guest]: if people by and large benefit from x system whatever that system is and they want you to
[Guest]: sign up for that system it is because they actually do know something about life that you
[Guest]: don't or you know something about life too but you're concealing it under these this garbage
[Guest]: words like development you know who is developing what is developing uh gdp is just a number a
[Guest]: number developing means nothing uh numbers of people who are able to live healthy lives longer
[Guest]: maybe that means something but is your gdp doing that if it is not able to do that if there are a
[Guest]: if the number of malnutrition kids or kids suffering stunting is not going down but your
[Guest]: gdp is still going up then there's something wrong with the way you measure things or the
[Guest]: things to which you attach labels like growth or development that was a rant sorry i took off
[Amit Varma]: no that was a lovely rant and uh uh you know i agree with all of that i had an i did an episode
[Amit Varma]: on gdp with the economist rajeshwari sengupta where we both spoke about how incredibly flawed
[Amit Varma]: the measure is it just makes me angry when people uh in many different ways i mean of course it is
[Amit Varma]: a metric that can be gamed but even beyond that conceptually it's sort of deeply flawed and as far
[Amit Varma]: as development is concerned i think the way gandhiji would have defined it is the one that
[Amit Varma]: i think is most relevant to india where his uh understanding of development really was that if
[Amit Varma]: you know if you show me a policy i want to see whether it will help the poorest person
[Amit Varma]: and if it does then i'm with it otherwise i'm not and i think uh you know there are ways that both
[Amit Varma]: you and i can agree upon where that can happen but unfortunately we've gone and entirely the
[Amit Varma]: wrong direction so we should now i think get to the subject of what the first chapter of your book
[Amit Varma]: is about which is the ongoing colonization that happens in india but let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break then and then we shall return to the subject on the scene and the unseen i often speak about
[Amit Varma]: positive some games well if you want to be surrounded by beauty and you love fine art
[Amit Varma]: i have a win-win proposition for you head on over to indiancolors.com indian colors licenses images
[Amit Varma]: of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists in india and adapts them to objects of
[Amit Varma]: everyday use like tote bags pouches and home decor items you get to surround yourself with
[Amit Varma]: the finest modern indian art at affordable prices and artists get royalties for every product you
[Amit Varma]: buy win-win game the indian colors new ranges in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for
[Amit Varma]: women and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as tanmay samanta manisha
[Amit Varma]: ghera baswari shruti nelson pradeep mishra and jaydeep herota stay home but dress smart and if
[Amit Varma]: you're missing your friends in these lockdown days worry not you can show them you're thinking of
[Amit Varma]: them by buying gifts for them from indian colors corporate gifting is also available so head on
[Amit Varma]: over to indiancolors.com that's colors with an ou and make art a part of your life and hey for a 15
[Amit Varma]: percent discount use the code unseen that's right unseen for 15 off at indiancolors.com
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen i'm chatting with annie zaidi about the remarkable
[Amit Varma]: sweep of her career so i don't even know what this episode about but it's about many things
[Amit Varma]: and and there's much in all her work that is thought-provoking for me and i hope we can
[Amit Varma]: talk about some of that as we go along uh let's talk about you know the first chapter of bread
[Amit Varma]: cement cactus because it was really interesting to me in the sense that i picked it up now i have
[Amit Varma]: known you a little bit we've been kind of acquainted for many many years since the blogging days
[Amit Varma]: so i thought it's a memoir and let me read it and you know one of the things that i loved about the
[Amit Varma]: book is that how it's sort of got the skin of a memoir but you know you'll talk a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about yourself but then through that you'll talk about something much larger than that
[Amit Varma]: and and it's very well done you know it flows beautifully in a sense and even sort of the
[Amit Varma]: memoir aspects of it are more sort of impressionistic rather than a detailed chronology
[Amit Varma]: that this happened and then that happened and all of that and it works very well together now
[Amit Varma]: as we've discussed in the earlier part of the show you grew up in this small town called
[Amit Varma]: a small colony a township i don't know what word you would give it but colony is most apt i guess
[Amit Varma]: is called jk puram so tell me a little bit like you've spoken about the hierarchies within jk
[Amit Varma]: puram of course that there were abcd housing for different classes of people and there's this
[Amit Varma]: poignant moment where your mom is promoted so you are moving to a higher housing and one of the e
[Amit Varma]: girls is saying now you'll only hang out with the c girls but beyond all of that outside all of this
[Amit Varma]: there's another much bigger game playing out that can only be described as colonization making the
[Guest]: term colony apt that tell me a little bit about all of that um so i'm intrigued by the use of
[Guest]: this word colony for residential places or industrial places i mean even in delhi you
[Guest]: sometimes hear for residential places people use the word colony um in this context i began to
[Guest]: think about it uh in the context of colonization particularly because once i got into the history
[Guest]: of it uh of you know what is this place i got interested in that you know how how do people
[Guest]: just land up in the middle of nowhere and create something new and more importantly what was that
[Guest]: before in india at least i don't think there there is any place where there is nothing before
[Guest]: and and in colonial narratives and colonization narratives or rather
[Guest]: counter-colonial narratives we see a lot of this of you know there was nothing there before
[Guest]: and uh for example in the australian context i've read this book i think it is called the
[Guest]: the dark river or the secret river or something like that which is about
[Guest]: people mostly convicts who were sent away from england to australia and uh it's a lovely book
[Guest]: it's a lovely book it it also takes a not unsympathetic view of the the people who went
[Guest]: because their lives were very difficult too and and the laws were terrible in england at the time
[Guest]: you could be uh jailed for like kids were being jailed for stealing bread and things like that
[Guest]: and a lot of people who were sent away to australia as convicts were just teenagers
[Guest]: who'd stolen a hanky or a pot or a chicken or things like that just food so these were
[Guest]: desperately poor people and it was a miracle they survived that long journey going to a completely
[Guest]: alien place with nothing really and and if you survive then okay maybe you could make a new life
[Guest]: there but they show up there and the thing is the point of that book really is that there was
[Guest]: somebody there and that they knew there was somebody there they pretended that there was
[Guest]: nothing there they pretended that these people were savages and that they didn't know agriculture
[Guest]: and that we went there and we made agriculture but then the writer says that through the this
[Guest]: family that has gone there and the protagonist the man of the family he sees that there are patches
[Guest]: which were already being cultivated it wasn't the same kind of cultivation that the english were
[Guest]: used to but it was cultivation they had agriculture they knew how to make fire they knew how to hunt
[Guest]: kangaroo they had their own lives their own whatever it was and when they began to take
[Guest]: over the lands there was a lot of land but when they began to take over these lands they were
[Guest]: aware the new settlers that they were taking something over it wasn't uninhabited land
[Guest]: and you see this within india quite a bit you know when something new comes up it doesn't come
[Guest]: out of nothing that there is something there and what happens to that something then is the big
[Guest]: question it's not as simple as imperialism for example because we are a union right what is the
[Guest]: meaning of india it is the union of india so people are free to live and work and capitalize on the
[Guest]: natural resources of the land anywhere in the country that that is part of being what a union
[Guest]: means at the same time there is a kind of taking over a kind of effacement of what was there before
[Guest]: in my case it was very stark because the name of where we lived it was written up there in painted
[Guest]: in limestone on the hills right so in a way it was like you were stamping the landscape itself
[Guest]: with the name of an industrial township right and that the name of the industrial township is what
[Guest]: the township does not take the name of the places that existed there before it takes its name from
[Guest]: the names of industrialists so it's effectively the name what is jk the name the initials of the
[Guest]: industrialists the family that owned the place and this is true of others also i shouldn't single
[Guest]: out one place it's true of tata nagar for example it's true of other places elsewhere you know
[Guest]: wherever these sort of colonies come up the assumption is like for example tata nagar what
[Guest]: what was there there was something there right wasn't that nothing existed but when an enterprise
[Guest]: a privately owned enterprise enters a space transforms it manufactures something there
[Guest]: creates new buildings etc but effaces what was there before starting with the name you know
[Guest]: starting with stamping your own name on the landscape to then other things then using the
[Guest]: natural resources obviously the land is of course used the mountains are used the limestone is used
[Guest]: water is used groundwater or the river water is used and all of this goes into doing something
[Guest]: manufacturing cement right now you can argue that it's for the good of the country because we need
[Guest]: cement for construction and so on but where profit is concerned the profit does not stay here the
[Guest]: profit is channeled out somewhere in these respects i do think it is similar to the process of
[Guest]: colonization because when you construct a colony come in there sometimes you change names sometimes
[Guest]: you don't you promise the local population something i mean even in imperial terms that
[Guest]: this was what was done it was not that the locals had nothing to do with the enterprise of course
[Guest]: they did the armies were indian by and large everything was indian but the key thing was that
[Guest]: the prophets left the place so in our case in a large sense when we speak of colonization we speak
[Guest]: of nations or continents you know like whatever south asia was we were completely colonized and
[Guest]: we had nothing at the end of all of these things railways were built but not to our purposes
[Guest]: things were being made not things that we needed things some other people needed
[Guest]: and they decided for us how much we would participate and they took back the profits
[Guest]: of that enterprise to another location so in this way i think when someone enters a place
[Guest]: yes they try to do their bit they try to give back to the community they set up schools hospitals all
[Guest]: of that no disputing that but what is the primary purpose here the primary purpose is that you will
[Guest]: enter a space use the natural resources take the help of the local people create something
[Guest]: so that you may profit and that place is not the primary holder of that profit and you yourself do
[Guest]: not live there you think of something else's home right you set up industry somewhere else you have
[Guest]: your life somewhere else you're invested in making that place ultimately more habitable
[Guest]: than this place which you know will ultimately run out of deposits how long can a natural resource
[Guest]: last it's going to come to an end maybe in maybe not in 10 years maybe after 50 years what after
[Guest]: that the money isn't staying in that community so those were some of the things i was thinking
[Guest]: and these are very complex questions because it brings you back to the question of so then
[Guest]: should we have no development so who can exploit what and in what way but i think it's worth having
[Guest]: a conversation about how much of the profit and how much of the resources can be taken
[Guest]: and how far they can be taken from the place where they are being exploited that's illuminating i'll
[Amit Varma]: share a couple of thoughts and then i'll come back with sort of a question which has kind of
[Amit Varma]: puzzled me for a while and you know let me see what you think about it but first a couple of
[Amit Varma]: thoughts number one that when you talk of it as colonization i would not even put the caveat that
[Amit Varma]: you put i think it is exactly colonization even if they're not separate countries partly because
[Amit Varma]: you know when you look at language when you look at terminology you refer to the union of india
[Amit Varma]: what is the union of india right the union of india was essentially we kicked the british out
[Amit Varma]: and then the way that the princely states came together and all of that it's not as if there
[Amit Varma]: was a consensus everybody agreed to join the union of india and so on you're just willy-nilly
[Amit Varma]: part of it you know it's not any more respectful of individual autonomy than necessarily
[Amit Varma]: uh colonialism was in fact even that other phrase uh you know cement being for the good of the
[Amit Varma]: country any argument that i think invokes a collective good is always problematic because
[Amit Varma]: it's pointless to talk about the good of the country or the uh you know we've done a cost
[Amit Varma]: benefit analysis the benefits are better because in all of those the cost will be borne by one set
[Amit Varma]: of people the benefits will go to another set of people which was a point i made even during
[Amit Varma]: demonetization like first of all there were no benefits as i wrote repeatedly at the time but
[Amit Varma]: even had there been great benefits the costs are being borne by someone else and that's not uh sort
[Amit Varma]: of morally acceptable and on this same sort of strand you know earlier you had spoken about how
[Amit Varma]: in a different context in the context of language about how as a journalist say you go to a village
[Amit Varma]: you meet the sarpanch you're talking to the sarpanch but you don't know enough of the
[Amit Varma]: language of the marginalized people there to be able to converse with them so the sarpanch becomes
[Amit Varma]: a sort of a mediator through which uh you access all of that this seems similar to me to uh you
[Amit Varma]: know how the british developed their notion of what hinduism is i had a great episode with manu
[Amit Varma]: pillay on this uh uh where uh and he's written at length but you know and so have so many others
[Amit Varma]: where the british come here they're only interlocutors are you know the sarpanches
[Amit Varma]: of the time as it were which are the upper caste brahmans who sell them this particular uh notion
[Amit Varma]: of what hinduism is with the varna system and the castes and all of that a very manusmriti notion
[Amit Varma]: and they extrapolate that and that becomes part of their notion and that's how they govern
[Amit Varma]: and suddenly all of these diverse identities and traditions and customs are subsumed in this larger
[Amit Varma]: narrative that develops over time into this monolithic uh brahmanical thing which is which
[Amit Varma]: is not really so great and and which is not really so dominant rather and it seems to me that that's
[Amit Varma]: also you know you've you quoted uh tony joseph uh in your book tony was um on my show as well
[Amit Varma]: and the big revelation of his book is that what we know now from genetic evidence is that we were an
[Amit Varma]: inclusive society till about the year uh zero or you know till sort of the start of uh till 180 so
[Amit Varma]: to say and then one gangetic plain strand of thought about what hinduism wins over and you
[Amit Varma]: have endogamy and which is why uh you know david reich refers to the indian subcontinent as not a
[Amit Varma]: large population like the han chinese would be but as a collection of many small populations
[Amit Varma]: because of what endogamy has sort of done but that's a random rant but i thought it's interesting
[Amit Varma]: because the same thing seems to have happened to these adivasis where you're kind of bringing
[Amit Varma]: them into your narrative and uh you know as if uh and subsuming them now now my question here is uh
[Amit Varma]: sort of what i wondered about is this i i'd done an episode on the right to property with shruti
[Amit Varma]: rajgopalan ages ago i think it was episode 26 where we kind of both felt strongly that the
[Amit Varma]: right to property which which was diluted massively should have remained a right and
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the sort of solutions to this kind of situation lies in the proper application of that
[Amit Varma]: because what should obviously happen in these cases is if the adivasis have occupied the land
[Amit Varma]: for centuries they should own the land and then they do with it what they do now there are two
[Amit Varma]: things that can happen one is that they don't own the land and therefore the state will get together
[Amit Varma]: with cronies and they'll do all of this nonsense like another scam that is often run is you can't
[Amit Varma]: sell agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes right so agricultural land therefore
[Amit Varma]: to the farmer has no value because he can't sell it to anyone but if you change the land use
[Amit Varma]: certificate it can be worth 40 times as much so what the state will often do is they'll do land
[Amit Varma]: acquisition they'll say pay the farmer one rupee and then they'll change the land use certificate
[Amit Varma]: and you know give it to the industrialist or the industrialist changes the land use certificate
[Amit Varma]: allegedly what happened in the Robert Wadra case the other aspect which is where I am kind of
[Amit Varma]: where I don't know what to think is that let's say the adivasis are given ownership of the land
[Amit Varma]: but then these private parties go to them and they buy it off anyway individually one by one
[Amit Varma]: promising this promising that giving so much money and they may not even you know they may
[Amit Varma]: be asymmetric information they may not even have the all the information to make a good judgment
[Amit Varma]: and it goes away is that part of the mix of what happened that the the original people in that land
[Amit Varma]: did own some of the land and sell it off without knowing and if that is to be the case what would
[Amit Varma]: be a solution there because I think the other solution that I often hear from activists that
[Amit Varma]: you have collective ownership by the tribe of a particular piece of land just doesn't seem to
[Amit Varma]: work for me because it ignores individual autonomy and I think it's making the same mistake of
[Amit Varma]: thinking in terms of a collective so you know you've been to all of these places and reported
[Amit Varma]: from that and your book really didn't have these sort of details obviously because you were looking
[Amit Varma]: more into the sociological and cultural aspects which we'll come back to but what are your
[Guest]: thoughts on this so one of the things Amit that is really difficult for me I don't have a clear
[Guest]: position on this but I think one of the things I struggle with is the question of our notions about
[Guest]: what is ownership now a lot of indigenous tribes including certain adivasi tribes not all
[Guest]: adivasis in this particular place that I wrote about for example they did have very clear notions
[Guest]: of private ownership and and there were families who owned xyz and and those families did whatever
[Guest]: money they were given and I think that if there had been much more money given they would do the
[Guest]: same thing again so I don't think that that in in this particular case that this was a problem
[Guest]: but there are tribes that do not believe in private ownership they do believe that the earth
[Guest]: is holy or that you know nature is does not belong to individuals and that it should not belong to
[Guest]: individuals and I see that point of view too I personally it is true that if I owned property
[Guest]: I would like to think of that as my property and not think of it as other people's property that
[Guest]: it is true speaking for myself but I also get the the logic behind people saying and I also see the
[Guest]: limits of private ownership so when it comes to water for example I have forgotten the name of
[Guest]: the guy but some very rich person in the west on whoever he was said something ridiculous that
[Guest]: there's no need for water to be a basic human right and that it should be privatized
[Guest]: if you keep pushing natural resources and land is ultimately a natural resource you have to
[Guest]: understand that property is is at the heart of it it is nature and within that comes everything
[Guest]: else so minerals under the soil whatever you can mine etc etc but land air and water
[Guest]: are also inalienable rights right and there are limits to the transferability of that if
[Guest]: what is next air then and we are coming quite close to the point where we might end up bottling
[Guest]: and buying air and deciding that that you know what part of the planet is habitable and what
[Guest]: isn't and then what do you do and I think we've actually already painted ourselves as a species
[Guest]: painted ourselves into this corner if we're dangerously close to having to take these awful
[Guest]: decisions but where indigenous tribes are concerned I think from the land and water perspective they
[Guest]: got there much faster they're not there yet as far as air is concerned but if you say that land
[Guest]: ownership itself is sacrosanct then I think that there are limits that to that idea that there that
[Guest]: there that if you make a purchase obviously in law that purchase will hold right
[Guest]: but if you make a purchase and you destroy the land and you can legally because you own it
[Guest]: the impact of that decision is felt by other people who own other land but not yours
[Guest]: if you poison the groundwater it doesn't just affect your piece of land it affects everyone
[Guest]: so which is one of the big problems with this industrial takeover and like Gurgaon for example
[Guest]: one of the big flooding problem who could have imagined Gurgaon is a dry place it's flooding now
[Guest]: who could have imagined that that would happen but it's happening because bad construction taking too
[Guest]: much groundwater blocking off river access etc it's happening in all cities now so the impact
[Guest]: of one decision on private property done legally done the right way even then I feel that one has
[Guest]: to kind of understand that because we live together the collective idea whether we like it or not we
[Guest]: are collectively here on the planet so the collective idea must be taken into account
[Amit Varma]: even as we discuss private property. Yeah my sort of response to that is that I wouldn't say that
[Amit Varma]: private property is sacrosanct I would say it's necessary and it's necessary because there is
[Amit Varma]: scarcity and if there is scarcity of something then how does the world work you can't just have
[Amit Varma]: people fighting all the time over limited resources whereas you know a system of property properly
[Amit Varma]: administered can work to the you know works much better the other way of looking at it is that I
[Amit Varma]: think what you point out about what happens if someone poisons groundwater what happens to
[Amit Varma]: everyone that's much more likely to have happened with collective ownership I mean the tragedy of
[Amit Varma]: the commons always happens in the commons right you are much more likely to not give a damn about
[Amit Varma]: the quality of the water or the air or whatever when you don't own a part of it it's you know
[Amit Varma]: that's kind of where it comes from and without private property I think everything falls apart
[Amit Varma]: we've seen that all through the 20th century what happened in the Soviet Union and all of that and
[Amit Varma]: inevitably while it's a very nice concept that we all own everything and we live collectively
[Amit Varma]: together inevitably you know the powerful will corner everything and the rest of us will be
[Amit Varma]: vassals and serfs but I you know having said that one is not I think the problem in this case is
[Amit Varma]: that this is not how property should really be administered I mean if the Adivasis live there
[Amit Varma]: that's their property then the only question is dealing through you know thinking through
[Amit Varma]: the naughtier problems that then arise of what if individuals are acting without you know adequate
[Amit Varma]: information will they make the wrong decisions and even there I would argue that you know as
[Amit Varma]: as far as individuals are concerned it's sometimes dangerous to sort of condescend to them and say
[Amit Varma]: that oh they don't know what they are doing so this collective notion of what is right must
[Amit Varma]: sort of prevail but that said I entirely agree with everything you said about colonization and
[Amit Varma]: actually go further and not put any caveats there I mean this is what kind of state coercion sort of
[Guest]: uh leads to so uh so they're abstracted by disagreement please please go ahead if I can
[Guest]: just add to that um I think one of the problems also with the language of law like we were
[Guest]: discussing language earlier and the problems with that is that while I agree that things
[Guest]: should be properly administered etc the question is which brings us to the question of one who's
[Guest]: doing the administering and secondly how we're defining laws right so um people who can't prove
[Guest]: that they've lived now now law functions with proof right if and and this doesn't apply just
[Guest]: to adivasis this apply we're seeing ridiculous cases like people who are alive having to prove
[Guest]: that they're alive right in and as a legal entity am I even alive if I can't prove am I a citizen if
[Guest]: I can prove that I'm a citizen this the law is naughty for those reasons too that the burden
[Guest]: of proof is always on those who who cannot substantiate it and if you don't have paperwork
[Guest]: let's say we agree that okay there must be other ways apart from paperwork paperwork can be taken
[Guest]: away from you if there are other ways then what are those other ways those other ways are all
[Guest]: administration and power structures so somebody the naivete sildar the sarpanch the local guy
[Guest]: whoever your local clerk is at some local office will then certify or the local cops will certify
[Guest]: like they do with passports they come to your house and certify that you actually live where
[Guest]: you claim to live but then that puts you at the mercy of those people right we all know how that
[Guest]: works uh and then then the law then gets misused so it's a never-ending cycle I think you gave
[Amit Varma]: I think you gave the example of the Gond tribals that if they interface with you know the state
[Amit Varma]: the state won't interface with them in their language they won't even recognize their language
[Amit Varma]: so what are the poor guys going to do quick aside here one of my and this is an outlier but it's an
[Amit Varma]: interesting example of something like this working out one of my good friends Varun Mitra who's also
[Amit Varma]: been on this show worked for many years with I think forest tribals in Gujarat to establish land
[Amit Varma]: ownership and there was a big battle with the state and it took many years and my bad for
[Amit Varma]: forgetting the other activists at the forefront who worked with him there I've forgotten their
[Amit Varma]: names but there's a documentary called India Awakes which documents this and I'll link that
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes and how they managed to establish tribal ownership of the lands they
[Amit Varma]: claim to own was a use Google Earth data historical Google Earth data going back to all the 15-20 years
[Amit Varma]: that they needed to show and and they could actually show the houses and the walls and the
[Amit Varma]: habitations and they won that case the tribals got the land ownership and here's what is so
[Amit Varma]: remarkable that the moment they got the land ownership guess what is the first thing they did
[Amit Varma]: they all built toilets you know which is such a sign of incentives that when it's your own home
[Amit Varma]: then you begin to invest and there is no longer that fear that we could have to leave anytime
[Amit Varma]: and all of that and I find that an incredibly insightful story of you know technology solving
[Amit Varma]: almost ancient problem and you know getting people their rights though I fear it might be an outlier
[Amit Varma]: especially in our dysfunctional state but moving away from sort of the unpleasant topic of the
[Amit Varma]: state as it were you've also written at various parts in this book about something that has
[Amit Varma]: a lot of resonance with me which is defining where one is from what is home like you've you
[Amit Varma]: quoted Maya Angelou in one of your chapters where she says quote the ache for home lives in all of
[Amit Varma]: us the safe place where we can go as we are and not be questioned and elsewhere when and I found
[Amit Varma]: this very evocative where you spoke about how you know you wrestled with the tabiz that you were
[Amit Varma]: wearing with urdu on it and at first you hid it away and then later at one point you decided that
[Amit Varma]: whenever you wear it you will not hide it you'll wear it openly and at that point you
[Amit Varma]: wrote quote as much as home is a place of safety it is also a place where you are visible
[Amit Varma]: stop quote so can you expand a little bit on what your sense of sort of home comes from and where it
[Amit Varma]: evolves from like you know of course you spent a bunch of your childhood in JK Puram that's not
[Amit Varma]: so much part of your home you seem to be much closer to Lucknow you've spoken about eastern
[Amit Varma]: UP, Azamgarh, Allahabad all beautiful chapters in your book which I'll recommend the listeners
[Amit Varma]: read tell me a bit about the evolving sense of home for you and because it is something I struggle
[Amit Varma]: with myself in the sense that I've never been anywhere long enough to really call it home if
[Amit Varma]: anything Bombay is home for me but it is where I live and when I equally think of the related
[Amit Varma]: subject of what is my community I don't really have one one can build communities of choices
[Amit Varma]: but otherwise one feels kind of rootless and homeless and all of that and like me you're a
[Amit Varma]: migrant to this great city or great in terms of big city though it is great in many ways tell me
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about you know your conceptual sort of journey through understanding what this home
[Guest]: could mean and what I think when I started out with this book one of the things I had to do was
[Guest]: you know write an essay and I threw everything I had in my mind into the essay it was kind of just
[Guest]: sort of free-floating ideas in my head and I start with the image of the grave for example
[Guest]: and then I move into language and safety notions of safety and alienation and citizenship so I
[Guest]: think safety is key certainly I think that home needs to be a true home needs to be to feel like
[Guest]: a safe space and of course lots of homes aren't safe but I think that those homes then are
[Guest]: possibly either houses rather more than homes or they are homes in the sense that you do love the
[Guest]: people involved it could be your parents could be your siblings etc but if that space is not safe
[Guest]: for you ultimately you're not going to feel at home there and you're going to want to leave sooner
[Guest]: or later that's going to happen and if you're not then you're effectively trapped and a slave and
[Guest]: it's a horrible situation so safety and freedom are both not only safety but the freedom of
[Guest]: only safety but the freedom also to grow into the kind of person that you feel like you want to grow
[Guest]: into as long as you're not obviously hurting other people but I think those two things are
[Guest]: absolutely key to home and that applies to both your immediate family home and in a larger sense
[Guest]: to the nation itself that the nation needs to feel like it's a safe place for you and you need
[Guest]: to be able to when I use the word visible I mean to be seen in the sense that you can be seen to be
[Guest]: who you are now in my case it could have been I use the example of the Aitul Kursi which I was
[Guest]: wearing but it could be you know like there was somebody else who was reading an Urdu book on
[Guest]: the metro train and and was told to go to Pakistan for those reasons or it could be something else
[Guest]: like it could be a sexuality for example I mean now we have the ongoing argument about same-sex
[Guest]: marriage it could be that it could be a bunch of things really I mean these things constantly
[Guest]: evolve like for example when the Khalistan movement was on and there was a lot of killings of Sikhs
[Guest]: and young Sikh boys particularly a lot of people left the country around that time they sought
[Guest]: asylum in other countries or they just migrated any way they could and one of the reasons was
[Guest]: that they were not feeling safe it wasn't just a question of territory it was also that as a
[Guest]: community that community stopped feeling that the state was doing right by them and they weren't
[Guest]: sure whether they could trust the state at that particular point of time so I do think that safety
[Guest]: is key self-expression is key that it could be marital choices or whatever it is that you know
[Guest]: that it could be language it could be a bunch of other things that I talk about but mainly I think
[Guest]: it is that a place where you are not being punished for just harmless things for being who you are
[Guest]: I think both at the individual level at the family level and at the national level wherever you face
[Guest]: a certain amount of hostility for being different or just being you know that that is I don't know
[Guest]: what the opposite of home is I guess not quite home or whatever yeah you know that that's and
[Amit Varma]: it also strikes me you know you've written elsewhere about there's this great quote by
[Amit Varma]: you about what your claim to India is in your words and of course your mother is an Indian
[Amit Varma]: Muslim your father was a Hindu who came from Pakistan and at one point you write quote I
[Amit Varma]: don't say it though I don't want to make any claims upon India through appeals to Hindu ancestry the
[Amit Varma]: stronger claim is that of Muslims who chose not to leave when presented with the choice
[Amit Varma]: resisting majoritarianism I genuinely believe is the highest form of patriotism stop quote and this
[Amit Varma]: is a point in a episode last year couple couple comedy also made that if you think about who are
[Amit Varma]: truly patriotic it's not the Hindus who stayed by default necessarily because they didn't have to do
[Amit Varma]: anything it's the Muslims who chose to stay and what you were just saying thinking aloud it also
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that all the Muslims who left did not in a sense leave home it's just that they suddenly
[Amit Varma]: had no home because the notion of safety is tied up with home with the way you're defining home
[Amit Varma]: and that kind of you know went away with them and in these present times where you know we've spoken
[Amit Varma]: about all of the politics you know coming from language and the way you know Urdu is associated
[Amit Varma]: with Muslims and suddenly go to Pakistan is you know something that is hurled at us so often
[Amit Varma]: you know I go back to your quote that you know as much as home is a place of safety it is also
[Amit Varma]: a place where you are visible stop code and the very sad question that struck me then is it then
[Amit Varma]: becoming very hard for Muslims to feel at home in India today the way it is because those layers of
[Amit Varma]: whatever safety that you had are being stripped away I mean it's not necessarily something new
[Amit Varma]: our culture has been like this forever you know things like love jihad and cow slaughter were
[Amit Varma]: issues back in the 1920s as well as Akshay Mukul writes in his excellent book on the Gita Press
[Amit Varma]: it's it's been there these are strains but obviously these strains have come to the surface
[Amit Varma]: you know and and it's gained more than sort of it's not just part of the culture it's politically
[Amit Varma]: dominant you've written in your book also about how it's so hard for Muslims to sort of get homes
[Amit Varma]: in Bombay a struggle that you know you face being Muslim woman and single and all of those all those
[Amit Varma]: multiple strikes against you so what are your evolving feelings on this because this is something
[Amit Varma]: that to someone like me it is not visceral I can think about it at an intellectual level
[Amit Varma]: but it is not visceral because I am not in danger right but for someone like you it's different so
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about how you're thinking on this is kind of evolved and where you see hope if
[Guest]: any well I'm always very reluctant to speak for other people I think this is one of the reasons
[Guest]: why I write so many personal essays and memoir and things because I always resist the urge to
[Guest]: speak for you know a community or the nation or write the big India book or whatever it is
[Guest]: speaking for myself I think certainly there is some degree of insecurity and I think more than
[Guest]: anything else the reason there were so many people protesting against an RCC etc was that it was the
[Guest]: first time in the language of law there was some discrimination enshrined I mean there was there
[Guest]: was no other problem with you know refugees from anywhere being in the country and they could
[Guest]: could be easily Hindu refugees from Bangladesh or Pakistan or whatever
[Guest]: but there is no reason to assume that Muslims in Pakistan are not under attack and they are
[Guest]: minorities in Pakistan and not just Hindus the Christians and the Muslims the Shias the Ahmadi
[Guest]: they are also under attack and this is the first time that specifically implicitly there was a
[Guest]: discrimination made in law which I think made it extremely problematic because once you lose
[Guest]: citizenship you know this is the beginning of the loss of citizenship or at least the beginning of
[Guest]: of discriminatory laws which will then expose you to a lot of harassment
[Guest]: where you're constantly having to prove you know some by way of paperwork or some other way
[Guest]: that you belong I think starting from there certainly people are very concerned I won't
[Guest]: say that they don't feel at home I don't know if because speaking for myself I can just say
[Guest]: that this is what I know that this this is home because it always has been and I don't know of
[Guest]: any other home or any other place where I'd rather be in that sense and I think all the Muslims that
[Guest]: I know at least even the ones who are very vocal and very critical one of the reasons they are that
[Guest]: vocal and that critical and a lot of them are relatively privileged you know it's not that it
[Guest]: is inconceivable for them a life elsewhere the reason that they criticize is because it matters
[Guest]: so much to them that they be here that that their affection not be challenged and that the sense of
[Guest]: belonging not challenged it matters that much which is why you're willing to risk the everything
[Guest]: else that comes with it the displeasure of the state or whatever it is but I do think that
[Guest]: speaking for myself I can say this that the fear was also quite real now and part of the reason
[Guest]: like I said is the law but also that more and more one sees that justice does not actually happen
[Guest]: where you're seeing a certain difference in the way violence and law enforcement
[Guest]: unfolds and the ways in which if for example a thief comes right now to my door right what will
[Guest]: I do I'll call the cops right and I have always all my life believed that the cops are there for
[Guest]: me right but if in my mind you plant a seed of doubt because of not necessarily one set of cops
[Guest]: but another set of cops elsewhere having behaved in discriminate-free ways or having said and done
[Guest]: things that they shouldn't have once you plant that doubt in my head that you can't call the
[Guest]: cops because of what might happen to you then or because they don't care then you have to live your
[Guest]: life in different ways right if you start counting upon the state to give you what the state owes
[Guest]: you then you have a very serious problem on your hands and you have to live your life in a different
[Guest]: problem on your hands that is I cannot even conceive actually right now what my life might
[Guest]: be like if I lose that faith and trust completely so far it hasn't been lost completely so far people
[Guest]: people are new people critique people fight because they haven't yet lost hope once they
[Guest]: lose hope then there'll be nothing left to talk about yeah and you know as far as the CAA NRC
[Amit Varma]: is concerned the reason it was such a big deal was you know not just a kind of the letter of
[Amit Varma]: the law where some people defended it by saying that hey but you know all kinds of specious
[Amit Varma]: reasonings were given I had a great episode on this with Srinath Raghavan as well but also because
[Amit Varma]: the intent behind it was explicitly stated you know there are videos of Amit Shah stating at
[Amit Varma]: election rallies that what would you know happen in Assam after the CAA came into operation and
[Amit Varma]: all of that so you could say the CAA was part of his toolkit as it were but to sort of get back to
[Amit Varma]: the subject of all that's you know one of the most striking sentences in your book in fact
[Amit Varma]: the sentence of the book for me which really struck me was when you wrote quote was partition
[Amit Varma]: concluded in 1947 or was it initiated stop quote and almost as an elaboration of that there is this
[Amit Varma]: wonderful quote by Maulana Azad where he wrote at the time quote it was being openly said in
[Amit Varma]: congress circles that Hindus and Pakistan's need not have any fears as there would be four and a
[Amit Varma]: half crores of Muslims in India and if there was any oppression of Hindus in Pakistan then Muslims
[Amit Varma]: in India would have to bear the consequences stop quote and after quoting him you said well they are
[Amit Varma]: right so in a sense just looking back on history and all your readings of it and
[Amit Varma]: sort of what you've seen around you would you say that in a sense there is a historical
[Amit Varma]: inevitability I mean nothing is inevitable of course but were the currents moving in this
[Amit Varma]: really sad direction anyway from back then because everything that is playing out now is not something
[Amit Varma]: new that has happened not some you know quantum leap of events this whole movement as you know
[Amit Varma]: movement as you know historians like Akshay Mukhulev and Akar himself in his recent book have sort of
[Amit Varma]: documented it's been playing out for a long long time and it's been coming to this so one of the
[Guest]: things Amit is that I am fundamentally against theocracies I do not believe in theocracies I do
[Guest]: not think they are sustainable over any length of time and I do not think that any country that
[Guest]: defines itself solely on religious lines can hope to be a properly functional country I mean it's
[Guest]: not like countries haven't defined themselves in religious terms before you know but they haven't
[Guest]: defined themselves solely in religious terms and I think it's been very rare in society where
[Guest]: partitions have happened like national partitions entire countries separating only on the grounds of
[Guest]: religion there are usually some other factors involved so there have been many kind of separatist
[Guest]: movements elsewhere sometimes it's about power political power sometimes it's about language and
[Guest]: culture and all of these are different facets of religion sometimes religion is used to kind of as a
[Guest]: tool to with which to extend your own political power like starting from crusades etc down you
[Guest]: know like turkey and the institution of the caliph etc etc all of these there was religious
[Guest]: power invested in rulers but there was never a time where any any prosperous good healthy society
[Guest]: chose to define itself in exclusionary terms that we are this because we are not that
[Guest]: I think the problem began in India in South Asia particularly at this time because the moment you
[Guest]: say that you know that that you can conceive of a nation or that you can conceive of national
[Guest]: boundaries as countries not on linguistic terms not on cultural terms not as geographic entities
[Guest]: that you know a solid mass of people who happen to be living together in the same geography
[Guest]: the moment you say that we define ourselves as x as separate from y the moment that happened
[Guest]: whether it was one bunch of people doing it or it was another bunch of people doing it it was the
[Guest]: muslim league whether it was the early thinkers some people say the earliest proponents of the
[Guest]: two-nation theory were also the proponents of modern hindutva if you begin to define yourself
[Guest]: as that which you are not you will always have trouble defining who you are and you will always
[Guest]: find the other within the other within the other like in Pakistan soon after partition that you
[Guest]: know the problems with the Ahmadi started because you decided that yes we are an islamic country but
[Guest]: they are not muslims let us not uh you know so of course there will be some oppression of minorities
[Guest]: uh you know so of course there will be some oppression of minorities but you will also constantly create
[Guest]: new minorities and when the oppression of the old minorities gets boring then you find
[Guest]: new ways to focus on you know appropriation or marginalization and we are seeing that Pakistan
[Guest]: is suffering uh the consequences of of uh it's not just the minorities that suffer the country
[Guest]: as a whole suffers right because conflict is conflict conflict cannot exist as a one-way
[Guest]: street that's inevitable and added to that there are all the other problems so it's not like you
[Guest]: replace one set of problems with another I think this is also the problem with India and India would
[Guest]: absolutely should have taken its lesson uh seeing that you know everything that has happened
[Guest]: in Pakistan seeing that this has happened we should have taken our lesson and
[Guest]: course corrected in some fashion and actively stopped trying to define ourselves as we are not
[Guest]: Pakistan that is the entire national identity cannot be reduced to that okay you're not Pakistan
[Guest]: but you're not China either you're not even Sri Lanka you're not even Nepal come on so um they
[Guest]: want to be Nepal well Nepal very strongly feels that it would not like to be India so uh I I think
[Guest]: there's a bit of a problem there and and I I do think that it is quite dangerous to press on with
[Guest]: this kind of because you know if you thought that you could have gotten rid of the Muslims by
[Guest]: creating Pakistan and then later Bangladesh then you say okay there's there's still a few more left
[Guest]: we'll just get rid of them in other ways uh whether it's through you know marginalization or
[Guest]: you know in political trying to find political solutions or then then what it doesn't take long
[Guest]: in Pakistan it didn't even take it's taken less than 50 years from the focus to shift from uh
[Guest]: the Hindus and the Christians as the other to the Shia which is a very large minority you know it's
[Guest]: not a small minority in Pakistan and uh and they have other problems on their hands they have the
[Guest]: Baloch problem they have this problem that problem poverty unemployment all of those problems um
[Guest]: I just feel that what happens in in situations like this I haven't read enough historically
[Guest]: but I think what happens is that you ultimately run out of others and you run out of political
[Guest]: solutions to try and address the otherization of minorities and sooner or later someone steps in
[Guest]: to take advantage of your inner chaos it could be an economic advantage it could be a political
[Guest]: advantage it is inevitable so India should be on its guard not to allow that to happen.
[Amit Varma]: Couple of great insights sir which I'll unpack one is of course the exclusionary aspect of it like
[Amit Varma]: uh when I did an episode with Akar on this a couple of years back in fact he pointed out that
[Amit Varma]: you know what is this Hindu nation really all about all it is is exclusionary it doesn't define
[Amit Varma]: itself in positive terms like we shall only do this or we shall only do that but in negative
[Amit Varma]: terms like right down to the language right down to the movement that we shall uh you know Hindustani
[Amit Varma]: isn't good because there are Persian influences we shall build a Hindu without Persian or you know
[Amit Varma]: love jihad is exclusionary the laws against cow slaughter obviously we know whether where they
[Amit Varma]: are targeted so they are exclusionary this whole Pakistan thing is exclusionary so that's a great
[Amit Varma]: point the other sort of great insight which seems to be the insight of the month on this show is
[Amit Varma]: what you sort of referred to about finding new others like last week I had Raghu Sanjalal Jaitley
[Amit Varma]: on the show very fine public intellectual and that's a pseudonym of course and Raghu spoke
[Amit Varma]: about Carl Schmitt's concept of politics requiring an enemy where the idea is that you always require
[Amit Varma]: an enemy to do politics and so eventually even if you manage to for example whoever is your core
[Amit Varma]: enemy now if you get rid of them you will find another enemy from within and you will keep
[Amit Varma]: splintering and keep splintering and keep splintering till till there is sort of no further
[Amit Varma]: to go and and one does sort of see this playing out within the Hindu right wing even now where
[Amit Varma]: there are these internecine little wars developing so even in a hypothetical thought experiment where
[Amit Varma]: you could magically suddenly all the Muslims of India could be put in Pakistan even if you could
[Amit Varma]: do that I don't think that would solve anything it would probably make things much worse which is
[Amit Varma]: anyway a crazy thought experiment so yeah so it's it's but I don't I don't know where it ends up
[Amit Varma]: because I don't think we have enough of a sample size of these situations playing out in history
[Amit Varma]: to know where we are going you know my earlier sense was that look it's going to get better
[Amit Varma]: but it's going to get worse before it gets better so you have to be patient and wait it out but when
[Amit Varma]: I try to think about scenarios in which it gets better it's really hard to come up with stuff
[Amit Varma]: let's move away from religion for a moment and talk about another major fissure within this
[Amit Varma]: country as it were now just yesterday or day before there was this ridiculous court judgment
[Amit Varma]: I came across on Twitter where a minor girl had been repeatedly raped by someone and the court
[Amit Varma]: to asked her rapist do you agree to be her husband right and this is of course that age-old thing of
[Amit Varma]: women being looked upon as a property of men which is enshrined in the Indian laws by the way I read
[Amit Varma]: episodes on this as well and you know even culturally like one of the heroes of the Hindu
[Amit Varma]: right wing is a guy called Karpatri Maharaj so he wrote this really interesting book called
[Amit Varma]: I forget what it's called but it it's something versus Ram Rajya I think it compares communism
[Amit Varma]: to Ram Rajya and there he says the reason communism can't work is because there is
[Amit Varma]: no notion of property automatically every woman therefore does not belong to anyone
[Amit Varma]: and she becomes a bucket from which any man can drink more or less quote unquote right
[Amit Varma]: which tells you how so many people think of women that they are the property of men so if
[Amit Varma]: a woman has been defiled as property then the rapist needs to make it good to her by
[Amit Varma]: adapting her now you've sort of written about this in pretty strong terms yourself in your
[Amit Varma]: chapter called outsiders at home where at one point you've written quote there was little
[Amit Varma]: difference between a wife and a slave in the sense that both were uprooted physically and psychology
[Amit Varma]: a woman's sexual choice was easily overridden she didn't control the fruits of her labor
[Amit Varma]: and just like slaves couldn't leave it was not for nothing that wives in many cultures referred
[Amit Varma]: to husbands as lord and master stop quote and of course you back it up with a whole bunch of
[Amit Varma]: statistics like you know the human development survey in 2016 which found that 74 percent of
[Amit Varma]: Indian women need permission from parents husband or in-laws to step out of the house even just to
[Amit Varma]: see a doctor and only five percent felt they had any real control over who they would get married
[Amit Varma]: to which you know seems a very real picture you know many of the people listening to this might
[Amit Varma]: be in privileged situations where they don't see this around them but these figures ring real and
[Amit Varma]: you've written a lot about this now you know just looking at what's been happening over the last
[Amit Varma]: few years one there has been a sense that people are making more noise about this you know you had
[Amit Varma]: the nirbhaya case you had you know me too breaking twice here not that anything happened to any of
[Amit Varma]: those men but at least in the rhetoric in public you see this being spoken about more but are things
[Amit Varma]: really changing on the ground what is your sense of it as someone who's been writing about it and
[Guest]: covering it for so long my sense amit is that they are changing and they aren't changing so they are
[Guest]: changing in the sense that compared to you need something to compare it to right so from everything
[Guest]: i've read and even from what i remember seeing i look around me in the urban context and i see that
[Guest]: things are different from what they were say 20 years ago or when i was a child or or from what
[Guest]: i've read in in you know literature of the late 19th and early 20th century so some things have
[Guest]: changed just in terms of the education statistics right you look at the education statistics since
[Guest]: india won independence and you will see that for both men and women that education is much more
[Guest]: widely available literacy is much more widely available even from when i wrote my first book
[Guest]: where i was saying that i i did the math and said that i i must be one maybe amongst the top one or
[Guest]: two percent just on the basis that i do have some postgraduate education forget my income just the
[Guest]: fact that i studied that much places me in a position of great privilege i think even from there
[Guest]: even from 15 years ago things have changed a lot significantly many more women graduates the
[Guest]: average age of marriage has gone up it used to be somewhere between 18 and 20 it is now closer to
[Guest]: inching towards 22 which is above 21 and that is i think a very positive sign and i think if you
[Guest]: compare it to 100 years ago i mean when there were girls who were being married at eight and nine
[Guest]: and ten and i think at 13 girls were considered too old to wed and from there to where we are now
[Guest]: i would say that so much has changed a lot has not changed when it comes to safety and the reason it
[Guest]: hasn't changed is because i was just having this conversation actually earlier in the day with
[Guest]: another woman but she refused to talk about feminism you know in the context of some seminar
[Guest]: women's day something and she says that we have enough feminism women know what they want etc
[Guest]: etc the problem is that we have no conversations about men and masculinity we have so many
[Guest]: conversations about women and feminism but we do not men are not taught to think differently
[Guest]: they are not to change anything women are constantly being taught to change things
[Guest]: to break the ceiling and to shatter that stereotype and so on so the men are not
[Guest]: shattering anything maybe a very small handful of i mean apologies to you of course i'm sure you are
[Guest]: but in general by and large and and there is so much of a tendency to lord men for simply
[Guest]: acknowledging women as being full human beings and and we are so busy doing that at the moment
[Guest]: that and this is not true only of india by the way i read a lot of say blogs and conversations
[Guest]: in australia in the west in america in the usa you have these conversations outrageous conversations
[Guest]: where a woman gets raped or whatever or she accuses a man of rape and the only conversation
[Guest]: there is that oh he's an athlete and he'll lose a year and his life will be ruined and
[Guest]: ruined and you can't wrap your mind around that right that we are in this day and age even in the
[Guest]: so-called quote-unquote developed countries that this conversation is is unfolding and that it's
[Guest]: real but it is um i think that one of the things is that uh we haven't we haven't started talking
[Guest]: about it and i think we really need to start talking about the reasons why we don't talk about
[Guest]: it about the bodily integrity of women the absolute and full autonomy not just sexual autonomy but the
[Guest]: absolute physical autonomy that is due to women and all conversations kind of come to a halt around
[Guest]: this partly because the general fear of any sexual talk like in india the government and i i don't
[Guest]: think it's just this government it's all successive and previous governments over the last whatever
[Guest]: number of years refuse to have sex education in schools high school students i mean and the age
[Guest]: of consent legally is 16 so at 16 you should be able to not only have knowledge but also
[Guest]: be able to discuss these things in class at home these conversations by and large i think if at all
[Guest]: they unfold they happen maybe for five maybe not even one percent of the population actually i
[Guest]: think the other thing is that while we give women freedoms the whole idea is give women freedoms
[Guest]: like girls are given more freedom now uh language language so the whole thing is nobody talks about
[Guest]: giving boys freedom sometimes you give children freedom in general children again are property
[Guest]: in the way that women are still seen as some kind of acquisition the other is that we do not
[Guest]: talk about because women being women and the way that your biology works because you are the one
[Guest]: that gives birth to children i think a lot of the conversation dies down when it comes to this
[Guest]: question of children where there is this reluctance to acknowledge that the reason why you do not want
[Guest]: to give full bodily autonomy to women or to consider their consent is because then you will
[Guest]: also have to consider the fact that what she does with her body including childbirth and and what
[Guest]: she does with the children after that is also her decision completely and that you have either a
[Guest]: minor role to play or no role to play at all and uh this is something that no society is willing
[Guest]: to acknowledge not just india i think the west particularly too they do not want to acknowledge
[Guest]: the fact that if you allow women full bodily autonomy then you lose control over the children
[Guest]: that she will produce and it's an ancient ancient thing actually this is the fundamental
[Guest]: civilizational question starting from i don't know biblical or even before that whatever that
[Guest]: whatever that era was before that this is it's at the heart of all systems this is where matriarchy
[Guest]: shifted to patriarchy that the control of the children the fruit of the womb because finally i
[Guest]: read this very interesting thing that when a woman gives birth they call it labor right she labors
[Guest]: it is she who labors it is the fruit of her labors it is not the fruit of your labors
[Guest]: so who then controls the children who owns the children so to speak uh i think fundamentally
[Guest]: you cut away everything else it all comes down to that and all violence targeted at women
[Guest]: is ultimately targeted at controlling who she will birth and what she will do with those children
[Amit Varma]: fascinating and what's also ironic here is you know we were talking about colonialism earlier
[Amit Varma]: and a lot of this prudery around sex education and all that is really uh you know was given to
[Amit Varma]: us by the british with the victorian morality and you know it we weren't all you know as our
[Amit Varma]: ancient cave sculpture show we weren't always this uh prudish uh but we were always pretty
[Amit Varma]: misogynist but you know leaving that aside let's move into as we reach the last part of the show
[Amit Varma]: uh let me sort of talk about some of the themes that my listeners are always interested in which
[Amit Varma]: is for example reading how do we read more what do we read and i thought it's a particularly
[Amit Varma]: pertinent question to ask you because many years ago you put together this anthology called unbound
[Amit Varma]: which was writings of indian women through the ages fantastic anthology and you mentioned in
[Amit Varma]: an interview that when it came to you when you were the publisher came to you you said no i'm
[Amit Varma]: not an expert i'm not an academic i don't want to do this but she insisted and you said okay let me
[Amit Varma]: give it a go and then you started reading madly and discovered much more than you thought you had
[Amit Varma]: and of course one of the things that struck with me was the story you told about this uh early 19th
[Amit Varma]: century lady called rasundhara devi who you know got married at eight had kids knew the letters of
[Amit Varma]: the alphabet but wasn't allowed to read and she was in the kitchen all day and all she wanted to
[Amit Varma]: do was read and she wasn't allowed and then one day she kind of she dreamt about reading she wanted
[Amit Varma]: it so badly and then she would there was a book which was you know a series of sort of little
[Amit Varma]: slices of wood a sort of proto paper perhaps and from that book she would take one page at a time
[Amit Varma]: hide it in a box of atta and sort of read when she could and eventually she wrote this autobiography
[Amit Varma]: called amar jeebon but that's a digression and i found it a delightful story so i had to repeat it
[Amit Varma]: for my listeners but my question to you is this that clearly what you mentioned is that when you
[Amit Varma]: were doing the reading for this book it wasn't reading you would ordinarily have done you did
[Amit Varma]: it for the purpose of this book and it expanded your mind in certain ways and just as you know
[Amit Varma]: we were talking earlier about how the form that you write in can shape the content can shape the
[Amit Varma]: person here the reading you are doing is also kind of shaping you and in this case it was an
[Amit Varma]: assignment which came to you and you chose to do it but if one is to say to oneself that look i
[Amit Varma]: want to expand my knowledge of the world how do i do this you know reading in an arbitrary uh sort
[Amit Varma]: of way may not kind of get me there do you think that there is then value to building a sort of
[Amit Varma]: program for yourself even if you're not say putting together an anthology just to educate yourself and
[Amit Varma]: also what is the value of uh reading to you like you know i always say that if i read different
[Amit Varma]: books all my life i would be a different person completely so what does reading mean to you in
[Amit Varma]: that sense and what advice would you give to people who want to read more but don't quite know
[Guest]: what or how to go about it i completely agree with you on that last bit i mean if if i had read
[Guest]: completely differently i think i would have been a different person too and thank you for all the
[Guest]: nice things you said about that anthology i think for me that doing that book was completely
[Guest]: transformative um it it came to me as an offer to do this and i was very reluctant um i think
[Guest]: one of the things with me is also that i don't like to do things badly so once i said yes i said
[Guest]: okay now i i will not do the lazy thing i'm not going to look at 10 different anthologies and see
[Guest]: what other people have done and cherry pick right because i was doing a selection i wasn't doing
[Guest]: everything but i did decide to read everything i could find in order to make a proper selection
[Guest]: so it took me ultimately almost three and a half years from the start of the project to
[Guest]: its publication i read everything i could find by written by an indian woman in english translation
[Guest]: and obviously while i not entirely but i would say that i read for three years almost exclusively
[Guest]: women and that for me really was transformative more than anything else it completely broke down
[Guest]: every bias i had about what one about what powerful literature was i had these stereotypes
[Guest]: in my own head and i didn't know that i had them you know that that you think that this is
[Guest]: interesting or not interesting or this is powerful or this is not powerful or that this is political
[Guest]: or not political or merely domestic or merely romantic i learned to find the political in
[Guest]: everything that women said it did and wrote the act of travel could be a highly political act
[Guest]: highly act of great performative assertion of of absolute equality and freedom i learned all of
[Guest]: that um and for me that opened up lots of windows in my own head and gave me restored to me also a
[Guest]: sense of history so i wasn't reading only it was reading a lot of fiction a lot of poetry but even
[Guest]: within that there is history and it gave me a sense of where indian women come from when we
[Guest]: say something today we say it because we've been saying something else for the last hundred years
[Guest]: or we've been saying the same thing for the last 2000 years and nobody listens so i think all those
[Guest]: different things for me were very transformative and i think that as advice to people i think one
[Guest]: of the things you can do is to undertake challenges of the sort like like people say feminize your
[Guest]: canon or decolonize your canon i think there is some merit to that i have read i think after doing
[Guest]: the book after about three years i took a deep breath and i said okay i should start reading men
[Guest]: again can't exclusively read women forever i think i still lean more towards uh where fiction is
[Guest]: concerned i find myself now leaning more and this is this is something that has happened now it it
[Guest]: wasn't true of me before as a reader but i find that i end up reading a lot more women's fiction
[Guest]: and i enjoy it in different ways now not to say that i don't enjoy men writing fiction just that i
[Guest]: find that i think earlier without knowing it i had this inherent bias against fiction by women i
[Guest]: thought of it as more limited and i think now i'm finally free of that bias so i reach for it more
[Guest]: often similarly i think i also decided at some point that i will read much more international
[Guest]: literature i'm still working my way sort of around that i haven't quite succeeded but there is a
[Guest]: certain bias in the way we receive literature because we read in english we end up reading
[Guest]: mostly things that are written and published in america and england and a lot of that is written
[Guest]: by white people and even if it's not written by white people it's written from the western
[Guest]: perspective you know the western view of the world which is uh both limited and limiting in
[Guest]: so many ways why should i a reader sitting in india learn to see the way the world looks to
[Guest]: an american writer in the midwest or whatever it is why should i not learn to see it the way
[Guest]: it looks from an egyptian perspective or from a syrian perspective or from an african
[Guest]: and any nigerian perspective or a tunisian perspective why should i not learn to see
[Guest]: the world in these ways so i think that is something i'm still working on i think it
[Guest]: does make sense if you can find the time and energy to read in these uh to restrict your
[Guest]: reading for some time and say that okay for one year only women or for one month only japanese
[Guest]: writers or for for three months uh only south asian uh writers or or only only
[Guest]: books about a certain time period so for example i've become very interested in the 19th century
[Guest]: in india and i keep reaching for books about that because i think also you need to deepen your
[Guest]: reading you read one book and you feel like you know this i think it's important to also resist
[Guest]: that and read quite widely about a subject that you feel you know or if you feel strongly about
[Guest]: something to then read 15 other things around it and see that are your passions rooted in
[Guest]: something or are they simply rooted in a kind of ignorance these are very wise words and i would
[Amit Varma]: add to that by telling my listeners that just read one month of any z to start with that's a
[Amit Varma]: good start and uh what you said about history is also very evocative it reminds me of this quote
[Amit Varma]: by alan bennett where he was talking about how the history of humanity is a history of the
[Amit Varma]: inadequacies of men and at one point he wrote quote what is history history is women following
[Amit Varma]: behind with the bucket stop quote which all indicates a subsidiary role they've been given
[Amit Varma]: in history the fact that they've had to clean up the mess and it is true that most of what we read
[Amit Varma]: of history is written by men about men and often for men so i'm going to sort of end this therefore
[Amit Varma]: with my last question that we all need to expand our gaze we have specific gazes through which we
[Amit Varma]: look at the world partly determined by our circumstances or whatever our preferences
[Amit Varma]: happen to be and all of that and sometimes we just really need to shift our gaze and open
[Amit Varma]: ourselves up to other kinds of writing like you did with you know while reading for unbound
[Amit Varma]: so um for my listeners and for me can you uh recommend you know as many books as you feel
[Amit Varma]: like from one to many uh that you feel are important for expanding that gaze whatever
[Amit Varma]: it is not necessarily from male to female or from indian to japanese or whatever but just
[Guest]: in general which can help you see the world in a new way um one book that i never get tired of
[Guest]: recommending is uh sultana's dream and the reason is that it is uh that it is also just good reading
[Guest]: and um in as a companion to that i would say read sunithi namjoshi's mothers of mayadeep
[Guest]: they're both fantastical they're both written by feminists they're both about uh uh a place where
[Guest]: women run things but one is kind of a kind of tongue-in-cheek kind of just pure dream dream
[Guest]: sequence you know which is almost wishful thinking and the other also tells you the limits
[Guest]: and and the nature of power itself regardless of who holds it whether it is men or women so
[Guest]: that i would say that read these two together if you can i would say read baby kamble's the
[Guest]: prisons we broke uh it is uh baby kamble is a dalit writer and so she also writes from the
[Guest]: perspective of being a woman in the community she doesn't write from the perspective of being
[Guest]: only a dalit individual she writes as a woman and and women's place in the hierarchy even there
[Guest]: i would say read her for sure i would say read uh i she's quite a contentious figure and lots of
[Guest]: people might hate me for saying this but i think that she continues to remain relevant uh so you
[Guest]: so you should read the high caste hindu woman uh by pandita ramabai i think um she took decisions
[Guest]: in her her own life pandita ramabai she took decisions because she had suffered some of that
[Guest]: orthodoxy and she wrote it as to reveal as an act of speaking up for people who wouldn't and
[Guest]: she's talking specifically of brahmin women at this time so she's talking about women who are
[Guest]: quite high up and so when you read baby kamble it's also important to read what high caste women
[Guest]: go through you read the dalits and then you read what the brahmin women uh slides were like read
[Guest]: the two together as companion pieces there is this very nice book which is a selection of sarojini
[Guest]: naidu's uh speeches and letters selection of her speeches and letters which i'm not sure it's in
[Guest]: print anywhere but if you can find it you should read it because we have always grown up thinking
[Guest]: of sarojini naidu as a poetess you know and it's kind of romantic and i grew up and i read the few
[Guest]: of her poems and i was like that yeah this is a little too romantic for me but you read his
[Guest]: speeches and my god she's a thinker fierce speaker um and and uh is able to articulate
[Guest]: not only the concerns of women but of a whole country really i mean she was one of the tallest
[Guest]: leaders of the freedom movement so read her for sure um i'll never get tired of saying this please
[Guest]: read gandhiji's my experiments with truth uh it's not by a woman but i i do think that one of the
[Guest]: remarkable things about gandhiji was that it is actually just that it is an experiment with truth
[Guest]: he does not take for granted that the truth is something stable and that it can never be
[Guest]: challenged and he challenged it himself in his own life and i think that if he had lived longer
[Guest]: maybe he would have challenged it even further whatever his existing beliefs were um and i
[Guest]: and it's also just well written so you should read it for those reasons too
[Guest]: um you should read ranjeet hoskote's very fine translation of lal derd
[Amit Varma]: which is her poetry is that enough i think that's enough and you know the thing is i'm almost
[Amit Varma]: feeling apologetic and regretful because we haven't managed to touch upon your fiction
[Amit Varma]: or your films or your drama or any of that so i'm going to at some point implore you to come back on
[Amit Varma]: the show after some time has passed and you can uh you know have a bigger list of books at that
[Guest]: time annie thank you so much for your time and insights today thank you amit i've really enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: this conversation if you enjoyed listening to this conversation head on over to the show notes
[Amit Varma]: for this episode where i've linked annie's books and her other work you can follow annie on twitter
[Amit Varma]: at annie zaidi one word you can follow me at amit varma amit varma you can browse past episodes of
[Amit Varma]: the scene and the unseen at scene unseen dot i n thank you for listening did you enjoy this episode
[Amit Varma]: of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to support the production of the show you can go over
[Amit Varma]: to seen unseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive
[Amit Varma]: and kicking thank you you